# A Guide to Programs and Services for Seniors in Ontario

## Introduction

A Guide to Programs and Services for Seniors in Ontario is your resource for information about programs and services available to Ontario's seniors. It is produced by the Ministry of Seniors Affairs and distributed by ServiceOntario Publications.

### Seniors' INFOline
1-888-910-1999 — TTY: 1-800-387-5559

### Additional Copies
Additional copies may be ordered through ServiceOntario Publications by calling 1-800-668-9938 or online at www.ontario.ca/publications.

## Table of Contents

1. ACTIVE LIVING
2. CAREGIVING
3. FINANCES
4. HEALTH AND WELLNESS
5. HOUSING
6. LONG-TERM CARE HOMES
7. SAFETY AND SECURITY
8. TRANSPORTATION
9. KEY CONTACTS
10. ONTARIO GOVERNMENT I.D.
11. INDEX

## 1. ACTIVE LIVING

### Community Activities

There are many ways to learn about cultural, recreational and social activities in your community. You can begin by contacting your local:
- Community and seniors' centres
- Service clubs (such as the YMCA, Rotary Club or Royal Canadian Legion)
- Cultural centres
- Places of worship
- Parks and Recreation Department

#### 2-1-1
www.211ontario.ca

#### Public Libraries
Ontario's extensive public and First Nations library services provide many services to seniors and their families in a welcoming, accessible and friendly environment.

Ontario Library Services – North
1-800-461-6348
www.olsn.ca

Southern Ontario Library Service
1-800-387-5765
www.sols.org

#### Seniors Active Living Centres
Seniors Active Living Centres help local seniors stay active, become more involved in their community and meet new friends.

Older Adult Centres' Association of Ontario
1-866-835-7693
www.oacao.org

### Sport and Recreation

#### Ontario Senior Games
Ontario Seniors Games Association
www.osga55plus.ca

#### Ontario Parks
1-800-ONTARIO (1-800-668-2746)
www.ontarioparks.com

#### Fishing and Hunting
Ministry of Natural Resources and Forestry Outdoors Card Centre
1-800-387-7011
www.ontario.ca/outdoorscard

### Travel

#### Travelling in Ontario
Ontario Travel
1-800-ONTARIO (1-800-668-2746)
www.ontariotravel.net

#### Travelling Outside Ontario or Canada
Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care Service Support Contact Centre
1-866-532-3161
TTY: 1-800-387-5559
www.ontario.ca/ruq

#### Retirement Abroad
Enquiries Service - Foreign Affairs Canada
1-800-267-8376
www.travel.gc.ca/travelling/living-abroad/retiring

### Employment

#### Employment Ontario
Employment Ontario Contact Centre
1-800-387-5656
TTY: 1-866-533-6339
www.ontario.ca/employment

#### Job Bank
www.jobbank.gc.ca

#### Ontario WorkinfoNet (OnWIN)
www.onwin.ca

#### Ontario Skills Passport
www.ontario.ca/skillspassport

#### Employment Standards Act (ESA)
Employment Standards Information Centre
1-800-531-5551
TTY: 1-866-567-8893
www.ontario.ca/employmentstandards

### Lifelong Learning

#### Continuing and Distance Education
- School Boards: www.ontario.ca/rus
- Universities: www.ontario.ca/page/ontario-universities
- Colleges: www.ontario.ca/page/ontario-colleges
- Ontario Learn: www.ontariolearn.com

#### Third Age Network
www.thirdagenetwork.ca

#### Independent Learning Centre
1-800-387-5512
www.ilc.org

#### Computer Training
2-1-1
www.211ontario.ca

### Volunteering

#### Ontario Volunteer Centre Network
www.ovcn.ca

#### Volunteer Canada
1-800-670-0401
www.volunteer.ca

### Recognizing Seniors' Contributions




# A Guide to Programs and Services for Seniors in Ontario

## Recognizing Seniors' Contributions

### Congratulatory Messages

You can mark a special occasion by requesting a congratulatory message from:

#### Her Majesty The Queen
For Canadians celebrating birthdays of 100 years or more and for couples celebrating wedding anniversaries of 60 years or more (at five-year intervals).
Rideau Hall - Anniversary Section
1-800-465-6890
www.gg.ca (> FAQ)

#### The Governor General of Canada
For Canadians celebrating birthdays of 90 years or more (at five-year intervals) and for couples celebrating wedding anniversaries of 50 years or more (at five-year intervals).
Rideau Hall - Anniversary Section
1-800-465-6890
www.gg.ca (> FAQ)

#### The Lieutenant Governor of Ontario
For Ontarians celebrating birthdays of 90 years or more and for couples celebrating wedding anniversaries of 50 years or more.
www.lgontario.ca (> Contact & Info)

#### The Prime Minister of Canada
For Canadians celebrating birthdays of 65 years or more (at five-year intervals) and for couples celebrating wedding anniversaries of 25 years of more (at five-year intervals).
Executive Correspondence Services Congratulatory Messages
613-941-6901
www.pm.gc.ca/eng/connect

#### The Premier of Ontario
For Ontarians celebrating birthdays of 80 years or more and for couples celebrating anniversaries of 40 years or more.
www.ontario.ca/wp65

#### Your Member of Provincial Parliament and/or Member of Parliament
For a variety of occasions. Contact the constituency office of your local MPP or MP.

To find your MPP:
Elections Ontario
1-888-668-8683
www.elections.on.ca (> Find Your Electoral District)

To find your MP:
Elections Canada
1-800-463-6868
TTY: 1-800-361-8935
www.elections.ca (> Voter Information Service)

### Awards Honouring Seniors

The Honours and Awards Secretariat manages Ontario's medal and recognition programs, as well as special commemorations and celebrations. Provincial awards honouring seniors include:

- Senior Achievement Award: Recognizing Ontarians over the age of 65 who have made outstanding contributions in any field.
  www.ontario.ca/uj97

- Senior of the Year Award: Presented by each municipality in Ontario to an individual over the age of 65 who has enriched the social, cultural or civic life of the community.
  www.ontario.ca/ruw

### Annual Events

Don't forget to mark these special dates in your calendar:

#### Seniors' Month
Celebrated every June in Ontario, it is a time to recognize the many contributions seniors make to their families, community, province and country.
1-888-910-1999
TTY: 1-800-387-5559
www.ontario.ca/seniorsmonth

#### National Seniors Day
Celebrated on October 1st, it honours seniors who have helped build our country and continue to make valuable contributions to society.
www.seniors.gc.ca

#### International Day of Older Persons
Also celebrated on October 1st, it is a United Nations designated day recognizing the significant contributions of seniors around the world.
www.un.org/en/events/olderpersonsday

## Services for Newcomers

Ontario is home to the largest percentage of immigrant seniors in Canada. If you are an immigrant senior, there are many programs and services that may be offered in your local community.

### Newcomer Settlement Program
Provincial funding is provided to community agencies that help newcomers settle and integrate in Ontario. These agencies help newcomers connect with language, job training and community services, such as health care. Services are free and are often available in multiple languages.
www.ontario.ca/p449

### Settlement.Org
This website offers information and resources to help newcomers settle in Ontario. Topics include employment, education, housing, health care and recreation. Some information is available in multiple languages.
2-1-1
www.settlement.org

### Ontario Immigration Portal
This portal provides information about what you need to know as an immigrant to Ontario from before you apply to after you've arrived.
www.ontarioimmigration.ca

### Learning English or French
Classes in English or French as a Second Language (ESL/FSL) are offered through local school boards. A wide range of training is available, from beginner to more advanced levels. Some school boards offer classes specifically for seniors.
www.ontarioimmigration.ca

#### Language Instruction for Newcomers to Canada (LINC)
This program is funded by the federal government. You must be a permanent resident of Canada to be eligible.
Citizenship and Immigration Canada
1-888-242-2100
TTY: 1-888-576-8502
www.servicesfornewcomers.cic.gc.ca

Some universities, community colleges, private language schools and community organizations also offer language classes.

## For Indigenous Seniors

### Aboriginal Artists in Schools
Part of the Ontario Arts Council's Artists in Education Program. It helps Aboriginal artists and Elders provide arts learning experiences in Ontario schools.
Ontario Arts Council
1-800-387-0058
www.arts.on.ca

### Elder and Youth Legacy Program
Offers program funding to Aboriginal organizations that wish to work with Aboriginal Elders and youth on a project basis on all forms of contemporary or traditional arts practices.
Canada Council for the Arts
1-800-263-5588
TTY: 1-866-585-5559
www.canadacouncil.ca

## For Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgendered and Queer (LGBTQ) Seniors

### The 519
This downtown Toronto community centre offers a wide range of programs and services, including the Older LGBTQ program, which offers a weekly drop-in program and a monthly book club for LGBTQ men and women over the age of 50.
416-392-6874
www.the519.org

### Senior Pride Network
An association of individuals, organizations and community groups committed to expanding programs and services for LGBTQ individuals aged 50+ in Toronto and throughout Canada.
c/o The 519
416-392-6874
www.seniorpridenetwork.com

## For Veterans

### Royal Canadian Legion (RCL) Ontario Provincial Command
The Ontario Command of the RCL has over 400 branches throughout the province. Legions focus on remembering those who gave their lives for freedom and look after the needs of veterans, their dependents and those still serving in the Canadian Forces.
1-888-207-0939
www.on.legion.ca

### Royal Canadian Legion (RCL) Manitoba and Northwestern Ontario Command
Comprises over 150 branches, 30 of which are located in Northwestern Ontario.
204-233-3405
www.mbnwo.ca

### The Memory Project
An ongoing initiative from Historica Canada, chronicling Canada's military participation from the First World War to the modern era. If you would like to join the Veterans' Speakers Bureau, the Institute will coordinate classroom visits for you to share your story with students at local schools.
The Historica-Dominion Institute
1-866-701-1867
www.thememoryproject.com

## Caregiving

Caregivers provide ongoing care to family members and friends who have a physical, cognitive or mental health condition. For information about home, community and residential services available to seniors, please visit www.ontario.ca/rux.

### Tax Credits for Caregivers
Tax credits may be available to the "supporting person" under the Disability Tax Credit and the Medical Expense Tax Credit. You may also be able to claim the Caregiver Amount if you are maintaining a home for an eligible dependent relative.
Canada Revenue Agency
1-800-959-8281
TTY: 1-800-665-0354
www.cra-arc.gc.ca/disability

### Employment Benefits

#### Compassionate Care Benefit Program
Federal Employment Insurance benefits paid to those who have to be away from work temporarily to provide care or support for a very sick family member who has a significant risk of death within 26 weeks.
Service Canada
1-800-206-7218
TTY: 1-800-926-9105
www.servicecanada.gc.ca/eng/sc/ei/benefits/compassionate.shtml

#### Family Medical Leave
Allows you to take up to eight weeks of leave in a 26-week period to care for certain family members who have a serious medical condition with a significant risk of death within 26 weeks.
Employment Standards Information Centre
1-800-531-5551
TTY: 1-866-567-8893
www.ontario.ca/ruy

#### Personal Emergency Leave
Most employees have the right to take up to 10 days of unpaid job-protected personal emergency leave every year.
Employment Standards Information Centre
1-800-531-5551
TTY: 1-866-567-8893
www.ontario.ca/ruz

## Finances

### Taxes
Filing your tax return by April 30th each year is the best way to ensure that you are getting the benefits you are eligible to receive.
Canada Revenue Agency (CRA)
1-800-959-8281
TTY: 1-800-665-0354
www.cra-arc.gc.ca

#### Filing Your Tax Return
You can prepare and file your tax return on paper or electronically. If you are entitled to a tax refund, the CRA will issue one. If you owe money, there are various payment options available.
Canada Revenue Agency
Telerefund: 1-800-959-1956
Payment Arrangements: 1-888-863-8657
TTY: 1-800-665-0354

#### "Learning About Taxes"
This free online course can help teach you how to prepare and file a basic income tax and benefit return.
www.cra-arc.gc.ca/educators

#### Community Volunteer Income Tax Program
Connects volunteers with eligible low-income individuals with simple tax situations who need help preparing their tax returns.
Canada Revenue Agency
1-800-959-8281
TTY: 1-800-665-0354
www.cra-arc.gc.ca/volunteer

### Provincial Tax Credits and Benefits

#### Ontario Trillium Benefit (OTB)
Combines the Ontario Sales Tax Credit, Ontario Energy and Property Tax Credit and Northern Ontario Energy Credit.
1-866-ONT-TAXS (1-866-668-8297)
TTY: 1-800-263-7776
www.ontario.ca/trilliumbenefit

#### Ontario Senior Homeowners' Property Tax Grant
Up to $500 for each eligible household to help offset property taxes if you own your own home.
1-877-627-6645
www.ontario.ca/seniortaxgrant

#### Low-Income Energy Assistance Program
Low-income customers can get up to $500 in emergency assistance for electricity bills ($600 if your home is heated electrically) and $500 for gas bills.
www.ontarioenergyboard.ca/OEB/consumers

#### Ontario Electricity Support Program
Provides low-income consumers with a monthly on-bill credit to reduce their electricity bill.
www.OntarioElectricitySupport.ca







Filing Your Tax Return

You can prepare and file your tax return on paper or electronically. If you are entitled to a tax refund, the CRA will issue one. If you owe money, there are various payment options available. Canada Revenue Agency Telerefund: 1-800-959-1956 Payment Arrangements: 1-888-863-8657 TTY: 1-800-665-0354

“Learning About Taxes”

This free online course can help teach you how to prepare and file a basic income tax and benefit return. www.cra-arc.gc.ca/educators

Community Volunteer Income Tax Program

Connects volunteers with eligible low-income individuals with simple tax situations who need help preparing their tax returns. Canada Revenue Agency 1-800-959-8281 TTY: 1-800-665-0354 www.cra-arc.gc.ca/volunteer

Caregivers and Benefits

Tax Credit for Caregivers

Caregivers may be eligible for the Tax Credit for Caregivers and other benefits. Please see the CAREGIVING section of this guide for more information.

Property Tax Relief

For information about property tax relief for seniors or people with disabilities, please see the HOUSING section of this guide.

Your Rights as a Taxpayer

As a taxpayer, you have rights including rights related to service, which are outlined in the Taxpayer Bill of Rights. These govern your interactions with the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA). You have the right to be treated professionally, courteously, and fairly. You have the right to complete, accurate, clear, and timely information from the CRA. If you feel your rights as a taxpayer are not respected, contact the Office of the Taxpayers’ Ombudsman at 1-866-586-3839 or visit their website at Canada Taxpayers’ Ombudsman.

Pensions and Other Benefits

Contact Service Canada

For information about the Old Age Security (OAS) Pension program or the Canada Pension Plan (CPP), make sure you have: The number that appears on your OAS or CPP payment. Your Social Insurance Number or the number on your Old Age Security card. If you’d like to have your benefits directly deposited into your bank account each month, be sure to have the full number of your bank account when you call. Service Canada Phone: 1-800-277-9914 TTY: 1-800-255-4786 www.servicecanada.gc.ca

Old Age Security (OAS) Pension

If you are 65 years of age or older and have lived in Canada for 10 years or more after turning 18, you can apply for the OAS pension which provides monthly benefits to eligible Canadians. You don’t have to be retired to receive the basic OAS pension, but you must apply for it. If you are a low-income senior, you may be eligible for other benefits as early as age 60. For more information on international benefits related to social security agreements with other countries, see the section on International Benefits.

Guaranteed Income Supplement (GIS)

If you are a low-income senior living in Canada who receives OAS pension benefits, you may qualify for the GIS as well. The amount you receive is based on your annual income or the combined annual income of you and your spouse or common-law partner. You must apply for this benefit and renew it every year.

Allowance and Allowance for the Survivor

If you are receiving the GIS and your spouse or common-law partner (same sex or opposite sex) is between 60 and 64 years of age, he or she can apply for the Allowance. The Allowance for the Survivor can be claimed by a widow or widower between the ages of 60 and 64.

Other Benefits

You may also be eligible for other programs intended for low-income seniors or particular groups such as veterans. Contact Service Canada to find out if you are eligible for a specific program. Service Canada Phone: 1-800-277-9914 TTY: 1-800-255-4786 www.servicecanada.gc.ca

Guaranteed Annual Income System (GAINS)

GAINS is a provincial program that ensures a guaranteed minimum income for qualifying Ontario senior citizens. To be eligible, you must: Be an Ontario resident. Be 65 years of age or older. Be receiving OAS and GIS benefits. Have a total income below the level guaranteed by the province. Ministry of Finance Phone: 1-866-ONT-TAXS (1-866-668-8297) TTY: 1-800-263-7776 www.ontario.ca/gains

Canada Pension Plan (CPP) Retirement Pension

Most people over the age of 18 who work in Canada pay money into the CPP. You must apply for CPP benefits; enrollment is not automatic when you turn 65. Some people may qualify to receive CPP benefits as early as age 60. For more details: Service Canada Phone: 1-800-277-9914 TTY: 1-800-255-4786 www.servicecanada.gc.ca

Disability Benefits

If you are a CPP contributor under age 65 and cannot work because of a disability, you may be eligible for monthly benefits provided by the Canada Pension Plan Disability Benefits program.

Survivor Benefits

CPP survivor benefits are paid to a deceased contributor’s estate, surviving spouse or common-law partner (same sex or opposite sex), and dependent children.

Pension Sharing

Spouses or common-law partners who are both at least 60 years old and receiving CPP pension benefits can share their CPP retirement benefits.

International Benefits

This program may provide retirement, disability, or survivor benefits to individuals who have lived or worked in another country. For inquiries: Phone: 1-800-454-8731

Employment Insurance (EI) Benefits

If you wish to continue working after age 65, you are eligible for the same EI benefits as other workers in Canada. You must meet qualifying and entitlement conditions. The receipt of pension income does not prevent you from receiving EI benefits. Service Canada Phone: 1-800-206-7218 TTY: 1-800-529-3742 www.servicecanada.gc.ca

Financial Planning

Everyone should have a financial plan. It’s never too late to get started. A good plan will include your current and future living expenses, sources of income, assets, tax planning, insurance needs and investments. You can find free guides on the Internet to help you get started or you can contact a certified financial planner. Elder planning counsellors specialize in working with people 50 years of age and older.

Registered Retirement Savings Plan (RRSP) and Registered Retirement Income Fund (RRIF)

Many people choose to privately save for retirement by putting money into RRSPs. RRSP contributions are tax deductible and interest you earn in the plan is tax free. Payments made out of an RRSP, however, are taxable. By law, you cannot hold an RRSP beyond the last day of the year in which you turn 71. A RRIF is a fund that provides income during your retirement. As with an RRSP, a RRIF is an arrangement between you and a carrier, such as an insurance company, a trust company or a bank.

Tax-Free Savings Account (TFSA)

This unique bank account allows you to set money aside tax-free throughout your lifetime. Each calendar year, you can contribute up to the TFSA dollar limit for the year, plus any unused TFSA contribution room from the previous year. Your federal income-tested benefits and credits such as OAS, GIS or EI benefits will not be reduced as a result of the income you earn in your TFSA or the amount you withdraw from your TFSA. Contact your financial institution to learn more or visit www.cra.gc.ca/tfsa.

Lifelong Learning Plan

This plan allows you to take money out of your RRSPs to pay for training or education for you or your spouse/common-law partner. When you withdraw funds for this purpose, you have up to 10 years to repay the amount back into your RRSP. Students must have completed an educational program before the end of the year in which they turn 71. www.cra-arc.gc.ca
Other Types of Investments

Understanding different types of investment options will help you to meet your goals in retirement. GetSmarterAboutMoney.ca is a website founded by the Ontario Securities Commission (OSC) that provides unbiased and independent financial tools to help you make better financial decisions. The website is run by the OSC’s Investor Office and is a great resource to learn more about GICs, mutual funds, as well as more complex investments. www.GetSmarterAboutMoney.ca

Financial Assistance

Ontario Works

If you qualify, Ontario Works provides money to help cover the costs of basic needs, such as food and rent. How much you receive depends on your family size, income, assets and housing costs. Your local Employment and Social Services office can provide more information. www.ontario.ca/ru1

Home and Vehicle Modification Program

Run by the Ontario March of Dimes, this program provides funding for basic home and/or vehicle modifications so that people with mobility restrictions can continue to live safely in their homes and participate in their communities. Ontario March of Dimes
1-877-369-4867 (press “2” to speak with an Intake Counsellor)
www.marchofdimes.ca

Ontario provides other programs to help seniors with mobility-related disabilities or impairments live safely in their homes, including:

• Many qualifying expenses for the HHRTC are also eligible for provincial and federal Medical Expense Tax Credits (METC). o The provincial METC is calculated at 5.05 per cent of eligible expenses in excess of the lesser of 3 per cent of net income and $2,266 in 2016. o The federal METC is calculated at 15 per cent of eligible expenses in excess of the lesser of 3 per cent of net income and $2,237 in 2016.

Examples of eligible renovation expenses include: the purchase and installation of ramps, widening halls and doorways, and lowering of kitchen or bathroom cabinets. For more information about qualifying expenses under the METC, see the CRA’s Income Tax Folio S1-F1-C1, Medical Expense Tax Credit at: https://www.canada.ca/en/revenue-agency/services/tax/technical-information/income-tax/income-tax-folios-index/series-1-individuals/folio-1-health-medical/income-tax-folio-s1-f1-c1-medical-expense-tax-credit.html.

For Veterans

Disability Pensions and Awards

Veterans Affairs Canada offers a wide range of services and benefits to eligible veterans and others. Disability pensions and awards are available for conditions related to service in the Merchant Navy, Canadian Forces, Royal Canadian Mounted Police or to those serving in support of the Canadian Forces in wartime or in Special Duty/Operational Areas. Veterans Affairs Canada
1-866-522-2122
www.veterans.gc.ca

Bureau of Pensions Advocates

This nationwide organization of lawyers within Veterans Affairs Canada provides free legal help for veterans who are not satisfied with decisions about their claims for disability benefits. 1-877-228-2250
www.veterans.gc.ca/eng/department/organization/bpa1

War Veterans Allowance

This allowance is available to eligible low-income veterans of the Second World War or Korean War. Surviving spouses, common-law partners and orphans may qualify for this allowance if the deceased veteran or civilian had the required war service. Veterans Affairs Canada
1-866-522-2122
www.veterans.gc.ca

Soldiers’ Aid Commission of Ontario

The Commission provides financial assistance to Canadian and Allied Veterans living in Ontario who enlisted and served in Canada and/or overseas in the Second World War or the Korean War and to their spouses or surviving dependants. One-time assistance is provided every 12 months to resolve a specific problem. Funds can assist with the purchase of health-related items (hearing aids, dentures, eyeglasses, etc.), home repairs, moving costs or furniture, and assistive devices (wheelchairs, chairlifts, etc.). Royal Canadian Legion - Ontario Provincial Command
1-888-207-0939
www.on.legion.ca Veterans Affairs Canada
1-866-522-2122
www.veterans.gc.ca

Benevolent Funds

Benevolent Funds assist veterans, ex-service personnel and their dependants. Applications can be made through a Veterans Affairs Canada counsellor or your Royal Canadian Legion Provincial Service Officer. Requests for assistance usually relate to basic needs (food, shelter and medical care) on a one-time only basis. Royal Canadian Legion - Ontario Provincial Command
1-888-207-0939
www.on.legion.ca Veterans Affairs Canada
1-866-522-2122
www.veterans.gc.ca

HEALTH AND WELLNESS

General Information

Call 9-1-1 if you find yourself in any situation where people are at risk and immediate action is needed.

Telehealth Ontario

Available 24 hours a day, seven days a week this free service connects you to a registered nurse who can provide confidential health advice and general health information. You will be asked to describe your symptoms and answer questions. The registered nurse may then advise self-care, recommend a visit to a health practitioner or refer you to community resources nearest you. This service is available in English or French, with translation support for other languages and a direct TTY number for those with hearing and speech difficulties. 1-866-797-0000
TTY: 1-866-797-0007
www.ontario.ca/ru2
Local Health Integration Networks (LHINs)

In December 2016, the government passed the Patient First Act, 2016. This Act expands the mandate of Local Health Integration Networks (LHINs) to include the service management and delivery of home and community care. The 14 Community Care Access Centers transferred their staff, resources and responsibilities to the LHINs in May and June 2017. LHINs can help you to live independently in your own home for as long as possible. For example, your LHIN care coordinator can help coordinate in-home services, including nursing, personal support (help with bathing, dressing, etc.), physiotherapy, occupational therapy, social work, nutritional counselling, medical supplies and equipment. In addition, there are other community services that assist seniors and persons with disabilities to live independently in their homes. Your LHIN care coordinator can tell you about other local community services that could help you, your caregiver or the person you are caring for. You can also directly access these services.

Your LHIN care coordinator can also provide information about LTC homes, other housing alternatives, such as supportive/assistive housing, retirement homes and seniors’ apartments, and financial options. Your LHIN care coordinator will assess your eligibility for admission to a LTC home and will help you with the application process. LHINs can provide a break to caregivers of LHIN clients from their caregiving duties (i.e. respite services) in the form of adult day programs, personal support worker hours/visits, or a short-stay in a long-term care home. Local Health Integration Network contact #310-2222 For more information about housing options for seniors, please see the HOUSING section of this guide.

Finding a Health Care Provider

The College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario’s Doctor Search is a free service that provides information about Ontario physicians. www.cpso.on.ca/docsearch Health Care Connect is a program that refers people without a regular primary family health care provider to physicians and nurse practitioners who are accepting new patients in their community. 1-866-532-3161
TTY: 1-800-387-5559
www.ontario.ca/healthcareconnect Health Care Options is a one-stop source of information that can tell you where to seek immediate health care in your community. Health Care Options provides a list of primary care resources, including urgent care centres, walk-in/after-hours clinics, Nurse Practitioner-Led Clinics, Family Health Teams and Community Health Centres. 1-866-532-3161
TTY: 1-800-387-5559
www.ontario.ca/healthcareoptions

Public Health

Public Health Units

Public Health Units offer healthy living programs and disease prevention information to all members of the community about healthy lifestyles including sexual health, vaccinations, addictions, and healthy growth and development. Find a Public Health Unit near you: ServiceOntario
1-866-532-3161
TTY: 1-800-387-5559
www.ontario.ca/page/public-health-units or search by postal code:
www.phdapps.health.gov.on.ca/PHULocator

ColonCancerCheck

This program is the first province-wide, organized screening program designed to increase screening rates and reduce deaths from colorectal cancer, which is highly curable if detected early. Ontario has one of the highest rates of colorectal cancer in the world. Make sure you know the risk factors: • Are you between the ages of 50 and 74? • Do you eat a healthy diet? Consider eating more fiber and avoid red and processed meats. • Are you a smoker? If you smoke, seriously consider quitting. There is no safe tobacco product and no safe level of smoking. • Do you consume alcohol excessively? Abstain from drinking alcohol. If you do drink, follow the low-risk alcohol drinking guidelines for cancer prevention; less than 1 a day for women and less than 2 drinks a day for men. • Are you physically inactive? Get active! Those who are more active have lower risk of colorectal cancer. • Are you obese? Reach and stay at a healthy weight. Having more body fat may increase the risk of colorectal cancer. • Do you have a family history of colorectal cancer, particularly a parent, child or sibling? • Do you suffer from inflammatory bowel disease (ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease)? If you answered ‘yes’ to any of these questions, your doctor or nurse practitioner can help you reduce your risk of colorectal cancer and recommend the appropriate screening methods to catch this disease early. 1-866-532-3161
TTY: 1-800-387-5559
www.ontario.ca/coloncancercheck

Diabetes

Diabetes is a serious disease that, if neglected, can lead to serious, long-term health complications, including heart and kidney disease, stroke, blindness and amputation. While type 1 diabetes cannot be prevented, type 2 diabetes can be prevented with healthy eating, weight management and exercise. By making the right lifestyle choices, both types of diabetes can be managed. Early signs of diabetes should be taken seriously. See a doctor to have your blood glucose (sugar) checked. Early signs include: • feeling more thirsty • frequent urination • a sudden weight change, either a gain or a loss • a lack of energy or feeling more tired than usual • blurred vision • infections that are more frequent or recurring • injuries, such as cuts and bruises, that are slow to heal • tingling or no feeling in your hands or feet • trouble getting or maintaining an erection. Contact the organizations below to learn more about diabetes tests, prevention tips and how you can more effectively manage diabetes. Ontario Diabetes Strategy
www.ontario.ca/diabetes ServiceOntario
1-866-532-3161
TTY: 1-800-387-5559
www.ontario.ca/ru4 Canadian Diabetes Association
1-800-BANTING (1-800-226-8464)
www.diabetes.ca

Bone Mineral Density Testing

Osteoporosis is a disease that can cause fragile bones and an increased risk of fractures. Bone mineral density testing measures bone loss due to osteoporosis. The results can help you and your doctor evaluate your risk of future fractures, determine the need for medical treatment and monitor the success of existing treatment. OHIP covers annual bone mineral density tests for individuals at high risk for osteoporosis and future fractures, and less frequent testing for lower-risk individuals. ServiceOntario
1-866-532-3161
TTY: 1-800-387-5559
www.ontario.ca/ru5 Osteoporosis Society of Canada
1-800-463-6842
www.osteoporosis.ca

Immunizations

Immunizations help save lives and prevent serious illnesses. Ensuring that you are up to date with your immunizations can help protect you and your loved ones against certain diseases. Those over the age of 65 are at higher risk for complications from influenza and pneumonia. As a result, it’s important for seniors to get a free flu shot each year before influenza season begins, typically in October. Most seniors need to get the pneumonia vaccine only once to be protected and it can be given at any time of year. Speak with your health care provider to ensure that your immunizations are up to date. Any questions regarding immunizations can be sent to vaccine.program@ontario.ca.

HIV Treatment

The AIDS and Sexual Health InfoLine is a source of information about sexual health, HIV, Hep C and/or needle exchange services. They will give you information on Ontario specific HIV related services. AIDS and Sexual Health InfoLine
1-800-668-2437

The Ontario AIDS Network (OAN) is a network of community-based organizations that provide HIV/AIDS education, outreach, prevention, and support/care programming and services for people with living with and affected by HIV/AIDS. For a list of members throughout Ontario contact the OAN directly. Ontario AIDS Network:
1-800-839-0369
www.oan.red

The Canadian AIDS Treatment Information Exchange (CATIE) is Canada’s source for current, unbiased information about HIV and hepatitis C. This organization provides people living with HIV or hepatitis C, at-risk communities, healthcare providers and community organizations with knowledge, resources and expertise to reduce transmission and improve quality of life. 1-800-263-1638
www.catie.ca

The Ontario HIV Treatment Network (OHTN) is a non-profit organization that funds and conducts HIV research and provides education, capacity building, evaluation services, data collection and monitoring for HIV services in Ontario. The Ontario HIV Treatment Network
1-877-743-6486
www.ohtn.on.ca

Ontario Health Insurance Plan (OHIP)

OHIP covers a wide range of health services that are medically necessary. As a resident of Ontario, you must have a valid Ontario health card to show that you are entitled to health care services paid for by OHIP.

Eligibility

Generally, as an Ontario resident you are eligible for provincially funded health coverage under OHIP if you: • are a Canadian citizen, permanent resident or among one of the newcomer to Canada groups eligible for OHIP as set out in Ontario’s Health Insurance Act • are physically present in Ontario for 153 days in any 12-month period • are physically present in Ontario for at least 153 days of the first 183 days immediately after establishing residency in the province • make your primary place of residence in Ontario. OHIP coverage normally begins three months after the date you establish residency in Ontario. If you are a new or returning resident, you are strongly encouraged to purchase private health insurance in case you become ill during the OHIP waiting period.

Ontario Health Card

Residents of Ontario must have a valid health card to show that they are entitled to health care services paid for by the Ontario Health Insurance Plan (OHIP). Either a photo health card or a red and white health card is acceptable to access insured health services provided the card is valid and belongs to you. Your health card is to be used only to access health care services. Do not show your card or give your health card number to anyone except a health care provider when you receive services or to the Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care. In most cases, your photo health card will have an expiry date that matches your birthday. When your health card expires, you may need to visit a ServiceOntario Centre to renew your card and have another photo taken. Renewal notices for photo health cards are mailed approximately two months prior to the expiry date shown on the front of your card, but you can renew up to six months prior to this expiry date. Red and white health cards do not have an expiry date. If you are 80 years of age or older, you may have the option of renewing by mail, but your new health card won’t include your photo or signature. If you are eligible for the mail-in renewal process, your renewal notice will provide this information.

ServiceOntario
1-866-532-3161
TTY: 1-800-387-5559
www.ontario.ca/exi2

What’s Covered

• Physician services: The ministry covers all insured medically necessary services provided by your physicians. Physicians may bill you for uninsured services (such as requiring a sick note) if you miss an appointment or if your health card is not valid. • Dental services in hospital: OHIP pays for some dental surgery when it’s medically necessary to be performed. You must pay the cost of regular dental services in a dentist’s office. (See additional Dental Care information below) • Eye care: A yearly routine eye examination is covered for people under 20 and over 64 years of age. Patients aged 20-64 with certain conditions may also be eligible for insured eye examinations by an optometrist or physician. Speak to your primary health care provider to learn more. If you are receiving assistance under the Ontario Disability Support Program, Ontario Works or the Family Benefits Program, you are covered for routine eye examinations once every two years. • Services from other health care providers: You may need to pay the full or partial cost of services provided by other health care providers, such as podiatrists, chiropractors and physiotherapists. Contact the Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care if you have questions about services provided by other health care providers. • Northern Health Travel Grant: If you live in northern Ontario and have to travel long distances for specialty medical care, you may be eligible for this grant.
1-800-461-4006 • Services in other Canadian provinces and territories: Many of your Ontario health insurance coverage benefits can be used across Canada. The province or territory you are visiting will usually bill Ontario directly for insured physician or insured hospital services. If you have to pay for insured health services you receive in another part of Canada, check the ministry’s website (www.ontario.ca/outofprovince) for instructions on submitting your receipts for consideration of reimbursement. Only insured physician and insured hospital services are covered when you are in another province or territory; therefore items such as prescription drugs from pharmacies or services such as home care, ambulance and long-term care provided in other provinces and territories are not covered. • Services outside Canada: For people travelling outside Canada, OHIP covers only emergency health services and even then at very limited rates. Ambulance services are not covered. If you are planning to travel outside Canada, you are strongly advised to purchase supplementary insurance as emergency health services provided abroad generally cost much more than OHIP may pay.

MedsCheck

This free program allows you to schedule an annual 20 to 30-minute one-on-one discussion with your pharmacist to make sure you’re using all your medications in a safe and proper way. Any Ontario resident taking three or more medications for a chronic illness; living in a licensed long-term care home; or living with diabetes can use this program. If you take three or more prescriptions for a chronic illness but can’t get to a pharmacy, you might also be eligible for an at-home visit with your pharmacist. Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care
1-866-255-6701
TTY: 1-800-387-5599
www.ontario.ca/medscheck

Ontario Drug Benefit (ODB) Program

If you’re 65 or older and have a valid health card, you are eligible for the ODB program. You don’t have to apply for coverage. If the Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care has your correct mailing address, you will receive a letter notifying you of your ODB eligibility about two months before you turn 65. Your benefits will begin on the first day of the month after you turn 65. At that point, you simply take your prescription and your health card to the pharmacy and tell the pharmacist that you are eligible for the ODB program. Your pharmacist will check your eligibility on the government’s Health


-36-Network System. If you change your address, you must inform the ministry. 
You can update your address online at www.ontario.ca/addresschange or at 
a ServiceOntario centre.


Co-payments and Deductibles
The ODB benefit year starts on August 1st. Most seniors will pay the first 
$100 of their prescription drug costs (the deductible) at their pharmacy 
every year. You pay your deductible when purchasing approved prescription 
products. Once the deductible is paid, most seniors will then be asked to pay 
up to $6.11 for each approved prescription filled (the co-payment) until the 
begining of the next benefit year.
Under the Seniors Co-Payment Program, lower-income seniors can apply 
to have their $100 deductible waived and their co-payment reduced to 
$2.00 to fill a prescription for an approved product. To qualify you must be 
either a single senior with a net annual income of $19,300 or less, or a 
senior couple with an income of $32,300 or less. You need to apply for this 
program. For an application, ask your local pharmacy, call 1-888-405-0405 
or visit www.ontario.ca/ru6.



What’s Covered
The ODB program covers most of the cost of over 4,400 drug products, some 
nutrition products and some diabetic testing agents listed in the Ontario 
Drug Benefit Formulary/Comparative Drug Index. To qualify, an Ontario 
doctor or other authorized prescriber must prescribe the drugs and you must 
buy them from an accredited Ontario pharmacy or from an Ontario doctor 
who is licensed to sell prescription drug products and who is linked to the 
ministry’s Health Network System.
The following products are not covered by the ODB program:
• prescription drugs that you buy outside Ontario
• prescription drugs that you buy at your doctor’s office if the doctor is not 
linked to the ministry’s Health Network System
• syringes and other diabetic supplies such as lancets and glucometers, 
eyeglasses, dentures, hearing aids or compression stockings.

-37-The Exceptional Access Program may in some cases cover prescription drugs 
that are not on the approved ODB list. A doctor must apply for this program 
on your behalf.



Diabetic Testing Agents
These are products that diabetics use to test their blood sugar levels and 
ketone levels in their urine. If you are eligible for coverage through the ODB 
program, have diabetes and have a prescription for the approved diabetic 
testing agent from an Ontario doctor, the program will cover the costs of 
diabetic testing agents on the ministry’s approved list. The number of blood 
glucose test strips that you are eligible to receive in a 365-day period is 
based on how you manage your diabetes. 
It is understood that there may be exceptional clinical circumstances where 
you require more frequent testing. Your physician may prescribe you an 
additional 100 test strips at a time if it has been determined that you need 
more test strips for exceptional circumstances.
Ontario Drug Benefit Program  
1-866-532-3161  
TTY: 1-800-387-5559  
www.ontario.ca/h8h



Dental Care
While you must pay for the cost of regular dental services provided in 
a dentist’s office, OHIP will cover some dental surgery that by medical 
necessity must be provided in a hospital. If you are a resident of a long-term 
care home, you will be given a dental assessment upon admission and will 
receive ongoing oral care by qualified dental professionals on a fee-for-
service basis. If you need treatment or services not provided by your facility, 
you will be referred to a dentist or other professional of your choice. You or 
your representative must authorize and pay for those services.
Some municipalities provide financial assistance for low-income seniors for 
dental care. You can learn more by calling 2-1-1 or your municipal, regional 
or district government offices.
In addition, the dental faculties at the University of Toronto, George Brown 
and Western University provide dental services at a fee generally lower than 



-38-what private dentists charge. 
Visit www.dentistry.utoronto.ca/patient-clinics, 
www.georgebrown.ca/wave/dentalclinic or www.schulich.uwo.ca/dentistry/
dental_clinics/docs for more information.
The Ontario Dental Association provides tips about oral health for seniors 
and can help you find a dentist in your area. Visit www.youroralhealth.ca/
seniors97 and www.youroralhealth.ca/find-a-dentist24 to learn more.
Assistive Devices Program
If you are an Ontario resident with a long-term physical disability, you 
may be eligible to receive funding assistance from this program towards 
personalized assistive devices to help you live more independently. Any 
Ontario resident with a valid Ontario Health card who has a long-term 
physical disability and requires the use of a device for six months or longer 
can apply for funding assistance. Each device category has specific eligibility 
requirements that must be met.
The Assistive Devices Program pays up to 75 per cent of the cost of 
equipment, such as wheelchairs, respiratory devices, visual aids and custom 
fabricated orthotic devices. For other equipment, such as hearing aids, the 
program contributes a fixed amount. For items such as ostomy supplies, 
breast prostheses and needles and syringes for seniors, the program will pay 
a grant directly to the person.
The Assistive Devices Program pays for 100 per cent of the monthly 
reimbursement rate for home oxygen therapy equipment and related 
services for seniors 65 years of age or older and for individuals 64 years of 
age or younger who are on social assistance, residing in a long-term care 
home or who are receiving professional services through a Local Health 
Integration Network.


Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care  
1-800-268-6021  
TTY: 1-800-387-5559  
adp@ontario.ca  
www.health.gov.on.ca/adp

Ambulance Services
If you have a valid health card and your use of an ambulance is deemed 
medically essential by an attending doctor, you won’t be billed for ambulance 


-39-trips between Ontario medical facilities (for example, between two hospitals), 
but you will be billed a co-payment fee of $45 for an ambulance trip to a 
hospital from any other location. You don’t have to pay this fee if you are 
receiving social assistance or certain home care services or are living in a 
provincially funded health care home, such as a long-term care home. 
If your ambulance trip is deemed not medically essential by an attending 
doctor or you do not have a valid Ontario health card, you will be billed an 
ambulance service co-payment charge of $240 for each land ambulance trip 
or the actual cost of an air ambulance trip.


Regional Geriatric Programs (RGPs) of Ontario
RGPs provide specialized geriatric services to help treat illness and 
disability in older adults who have multiple and complex needs. Working in 
collaboration with primary care physicians, community health professionals 
and others, these programs seek to meet the needs of the most frail 
and vulnerable seniors. For information about services, see the contact 
information below.
• Regional Geriatric Programs of Ontario: www.rgps.on.ca
• RGP of Toronto: 416-480-6026, www.rgp.toronto.on.ca
• Specialized Geriatrics Services (South East Ontario): www.sagelink.ca
• RGP of Eastern Ontario (Ottawa): 613-761-4458, www.rgpeo.com
• RGP Central (Hamilton): 905-777-3837 (ext. 12436), www.rgpc.ca
• Specialized Geriatrics Services (South West Ontario): 519-685-4000 
(extension 44028), www.sjhc.london.on.ca/specializedgeriatrics


Mental Health and Addictions
Specialized Geriatric Mental Health Outreach Programs
These programs provide assessment, consultation, treatment and education 
to seniors with serious mental illness, as well as to their families and service 
providers. In most cases, seniors with mental illness or their families can 
directly access these programs or they can be referred through a family 
doctor. To find out about a program in your area, contact your family doctor.



-40-Inpatient and Outpatient Services at Hospitals
Approximately 70 hospitals across the province have inpatient psychiatry 
beds that provide acute, short-term treatment for people with mental illness. 
A number of the province’s specialty psychiatric hospitals have inpatient 
beds that provide treatment for seniors with serious mental illness who 
have longer-term hospitalization needs. Many of these facilities also have 
outpatient mental health programs for seniors with mental illness, including 
day treatment programs and outpatient clinics.
In the case of a psychiatric emergency, contact or go to the hospital 
emergency department nearest you.
To access hospital-based psychiatric services for seniors, contact your family 
doctor.
Some Local Health Integration Networks (LHINs) may also offer mental 
health services for seniors.
Local Health Integration Network contact # 310-2222
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH)
CAMH is Canada’s leading addiction and mental health organization 
providing comprehensive, accessible care for people suffering from addiction 
or mental illness. CAMH’s Geriatric Mental Health Program is dedicated 
to the provision of specialized, inter-professional assessment, treatment, 
consultation and follow-up services to older persons with mental health 
concerns, with or without addiction issues.  The service has both outpatient 
and inpatient departments and it also provides information about affiliated 
agencies, programs and services.
Geriatric Mental Health Program Central Intake Office  
416-535-8501 (ext. 31942)  
www.camh.net 



Canadian Mental Health Association (CMHA), Ontario
CMHA, Ontario is a non-profit, charitable organization committed to 
improving services and support for people living with mental illness and 
their families. The association provides community mental health services in 
32 branches located across Ontario and develops public policy advice that 
promotes mental health for all Ontarians.
1-800-875-6213  
www.ontario.cmha.ca



-41-ConnexOntario
ConnexOntario operates three helplines that provide free, confidential health 
services information for people experiencing problems with alcohol and 
drugs, mental illness or gambling. Helplines are available 24 hours a day, 
seven days a week. 
Drug and Alcohol Helpline  
1-800-565-8603  
www.drugandalcoholhelpline.ca
Mental Health Helpline  
1-866-531-2600  
www.mentalhealthhelpline.ca



Ontario Problem Gambling Helpline  
1-888-230-3505  
www.opgh.on.ca
Smoking Cessation
Tobacco use and exposure to second-hand smoke is associated with the 
development and progression of chronic disease, mobility restrictions and 
a decline in physical function. Quitting smoking can enhance your quality 
of life and reduce your risk of illness and death. Counselling is a proven 
intervention strategy that greatly increases the chance that a smoker will 
quit. 


Smokers’ Helpline  
1-877-513-5333  
www.smokershelpline.ca 
The Ontario Drug Benefit program also provides smoking cessation supports 
to Ontarians aged 65 years and older, including coverage for prescription 
cessation medications and access to free cessation counselling by 
community pharmacists. 
ServiceOntario  
1-866-532-3161  
TTY: 1-800-387-5559



-42-Fall Prevention
Falls are the leading cause of injury among seniors and roughly half of these 
falls occur at home. Every year, one-third of seniors fall and often experience 
serious consequences to their health, independence and quality of life. 
Fortunately, many falls are preventable. 
Reduce your risk by following these tips:
• Exercise regularly. Adults aged 65 years and older should complete at 
least 150 minutes of moderate to vigorous aerobic physical activity per 
week, in bouts of 10 minutes or more. If you have poor mobility, physical 
activity can help you enhance your balance and prevent falls. Make sure 
you have proper footwear that includes rubber soles, low heels and laces 
or Velcro that securely fasten.
• Take a bone density test. Osteoporosis is a disease that makes bones 
brittle and more likely to break during a fall. At least 80 per cent of broken 
bones in older adults are related to osteoporosis, with older women at 
greatest risk of developing the disease. Ask your doctor for a bone mineral 
density test to determine your risk.
• Know your medications. Taking four or more medications increases your 
chance of falling. Speak to your doctor about all the medications you are 
taking to learn why you are taking them, what side effects they have (such 
as drowsiness or dizziness) and if there are alternatives.
• Reduce home hazards. These include loose carpets and cords on the 
floor, items blocking the stairs and poor lighting. Also consider installing 
assistive devices, such as grab bars or raised toilet seats.



Osteoporosis Canada  
1-800-463-6842  
www.osteoporosis.ca
To order related publications from the Ministry of Seniors Affairs, including 
What To Do If You Fall :
ServiceOntario Publications  
1-800-668-9938  
TTY: 1-800-268-7095  
www.ontario.ca/publications



-43-To order related publications from the Public Health Agency of Canada, 
including the  Safe Living Guide—A Guide to Home Safety for Seniors, You 
CAN Prevent Falls!, 12 Steps to Stair Safety at Home and If You Fall or 
Witness a Fall, Do You Know What To Do? :
Division of Aging and Seniors  
1 800 O-Canada (1-800-622-6232)  
www.phac-aspc.gc.ca/seniors-aines
Nutrition



EatRight Ontario
This program connects you to a Registered Dietitian who can provide free 
advice that can improve your quality of life. Visit the EatRight Ontario website 
to access additional resources that support the development of healthy 
eating habits, including ‘Nutri-eScreen’, an interactive web-based nutrition 
support tool targeted at older adults.
1-877-510-510-2  
www.eatrightontario.ca
Eating Well with Canada’s Food Guide
For years, this guide has helped Canadians find the right balance of nutrition 
and activity to stay fit and healthy. You don’t have to give up foods you 
love for the sake of your health, but you do need to aim for variety and 
moderation. Eating Well with Canada’s Food Guide can help you make good 
choices. 
Publications Health Canada  
1-866-225-0709  
TTY: 1-800-465-7735  
www.healthcanada.gc.ca/foodguide


Dietitians of Canada
This association of food and nutrition professionals is committed to the 
health and well-being of Canadians. It produces a variety of resources 
that can help you make healthy food choices, learn more about the role of 
nutrition in health and find a dietitian in your area.
416-596-0857  
www.dietitians.ca

-44-Hearing Care Counselling Program 
This program is designed to help seniors (55+) stay connected, independent 
and confident, offering information on communication devices and 
other available services in the comfort of their own home. Counsellors 
provide home visits, education, demonstrations and recommendations of 
communication devices.
Canadian Hearing Society  
1-877-347-3427  
TTY: 1 877 216 7310  
www.chs.ca



MedicAlert® Safely Home®
A person suffering from Alzheimer’s disease or a related dementia may 
have a tendency to wander and become lost, often without warning. To 
help these individuals and their families, the Alzheimer Society and the 
Canadian MedicAlert Foundation have partnered and improved the Safely 
Home program, incorporating the best features of both Safely Home and 
MedicAlert services. For a fee, members receive an engraved identification 
bracelet that allows police and emergency responders to quickly identify the 
person who has wandered.
1-855-581-3794  
www.alzheimer.ca (>Living with dementia > Safety > MedicAlert® Safely 
Home®)


Finding Your Way®
To enhance the safety of people with dementia who may wander or become 
lost, and support their caregivers and communities, the Alzheimer Society 
of Ontario delivers this program in collaboration  with local societies across 
the province.  This program raises awareness about the risks for people with 
dementia who may wander and go missing,  and offers practical advice for 
these individuals, their families and caregivers, and communities about how 
to how to respond most effectively should such an incident occur. 
Finding Your Way® 
www.findingyourwayontario.ca

-45-Alzheimer Society of Ontario  
1-800-879-4226  
www.alzheimerontario.org
2-1-1  
www.211ontario.ca
Community Support Services
Community support services are accessed directly by the consumer and 
help the frail elderly and persons with disabilities to live in the community 
in independence and safety. The LHIN can provide further information and 
referral to appropriate community services within your region.
Organizations funded by the government to provide these services are not- 
for-profit corporations. Some private for-profit agencies may provide similar 
services for a fee.
For information about the following community support services, contact 
your Local Health Integration Network
Local Health Integration Network contact # 310-2222
Adult Day Programs
These programs provide structured and supervised activities in a group 
setting for adults who need care or support. Programs usually include 
planned recreational and physical activities, meals, transportation to and 
from the program and some personal care. There may be a consumer fee to 
cover meal and transportation costs. Subsidies may be available.
Caregiver Support Services
There are various ways to help the regular caregiver, who is often a family 
member, to have a break or do some things for themselves. These services 
are called respite care services and can be provided in two ways: In-Home 
Respite and Short-Stay Respite.



-46-Client Intervention and Assistance Services
This service provides support to individuals who need help coping with 
activities associated with daily life, such as maintaining good nutrition, 
household management, locating services, filling out forms, etc. 
Emergency Response Service 
This service requires the installation of an electronic device in your home so 
that you are connected to an emergency response centre at all times. Often 
this device is worn around a person’s neck so it is within easy reach at all 
times. 



Foot Care Services
These services are provided by trained staff who assist by trimming toenails, 
monitoring the condition of your feet and/or providing bathing and massage 
treatments. Availability may depend on your needs and the extent of foot 
care services in the community. A consumer fee may also apply.
Friendly Visiting Services
This service provides regular volunteer visits to an isolated senior. Visits are 
generally made to your home, but the volunteer can also help run errands or 
accompany you while you do your shopping, banking or other activities.
Home Help Referral Services
These services refer a person who requires home help to an individual who 
provides specific services. A consumer fee may apply. 
Home Maintenance and Repair Services
Some agencies can help you arrange heavy home maintenance tasks, such 
as yard maintenance, snow shovelling, window washing or one-time repair 
jobs. If you are frail or physically disabled, an agency may make the service 
arrangements for you, but usually the consumer pays the worker(s) or 
company directly. 
Meal Services
Depending on your needs and service availability, nutritious meals can be 
delivered to your home or arrangements can be made for you to enjoy a 

-47-meal with others in the community. A consumer fee to cover the cost of food 
or transportation may apply. 
Social or Recreational Services
Available in seniors’ centres, these services consist of learning and 
recreational activities that encourage community involvement and 
intergenerational contact. Often referred to as Seniors Active Living Centres, 
these centres serve a wide range of individuals, ranging from those who 
are very healthy to those who require support in order to continue living 
independently in the community. Seniors are directly involved in operating 
Older Adult Centres in roles that may include serving on the board of 
directors, advising on program planning and acting as volunteers.
Transportation Services
These services can help if you are unable to use existing transportation 
options available to you or require some assistance. Transportation can be 
provided in a volunteer’s car, a community vehicle or a taxi depending on 
your needs and service availability in your area. There is a consumer fee for 
this service to cover the cost of transportation, although subsidies may be 
available.
Security Checks or Reassurance Services
This service ensures that a volunteer telephones you regularly to check that 
you are not in crisis or at risk of physical harm.
Palliative Care
Hospice palliative care is a philosophy of care that aims to relieve suffering 
and improve the quality of living and dying. It strives to help individuals and 
families address physical, psychological, social, spiritual and practical issues 
related to the process of dying. 
Complex Continuing Care
Also known as chronic care, complex continuing care provides ongoing, 
medically complex and specialized services to people of all ages, sometimes 
over extended periods of time. This care is provided in hospitals for 
people with long-term illnesses or disabilities who typically require skilled, 

-48-technology-based care that is not available at home or in long-term care 
homes. Residents are charged a co-payment that provides room, board and 
other necessities, in addition to medical care.
For information about organ and tissue donation, please see the SAFETY 
AND SECURITY (Legal Matters) section of this guide.
For Indigenous Seniors
Non-Insured Health Benefits (NIHB) for First Nations and Inuit
NIHB is a national program that provides coverage to registered First Nations 
and recognized Inuit for a specified range of medically necessary items 
and services that are not covered by other plans and programs. Coverage 
for benefit claims for a specified range of drugs, dental care, vision care, 
medical  supplies and equipment, short-term crisis intervention, mental 
health counselling and medical transportation are available.
Health Canada  
1-800-640-0642  
TTY: 1-800-267-1245  
www.hc-sc.gc.ca/fniah-spnia/nihb-ssna/index-eng.php
Culturally Appropriate Primary Care Services for Indigenous Seniors
Aboriginal Health Access Centres (AHACs)
AHACs are Indigenous, community-led primary health care organizations. 
They provide a combination of traditional healing, primary care, cultural 
programs, health promotion programs, community development initiatives, 
and social support services to First Nations, Métis and Inuit communities. 
There are currently ten AHACs in Ontario, providing services both on and off- 
reserve, in urban, rural and northern locations. The Association of Ontario 
Health Centres can provide you with contact information for the AHAC closest 
to you.
Association of Ontario Health Centres  
416-236-2539  
www.aohc.org/aboriginal-health-access-centres

-49-Aboriginal Community Health Centres (ACHCs)
Aboriginal Community Health Centres (ACHCs) offer a blend of traditional 
Aboriginal approaches to health and wellness with primary health care in 
culturally appropriate settings. There  are currently two ACHCs in Ontario.
Anishnawbe Health Toronto (Three locations)  
225 Queen Street E.: 416-360-0486  
179 Gerrard Street E.: 416-920-2605  
22 Vaughan Road : 416-657-0379  
www.aht.ca
Misiway Milopemahtesewin (Timmins)  
705-264-2200  
www.misiway.ca


## National Aboriginal Diabetes Program

This program raises awareness about diabetes and offers culturally appropriate programs and services for those affected by the disease.
1-877-232-NADA (232-6232)  
www.nada.ca


Addictions Treatment for First Nations and Inuit
Health Canada provides funding to First Nations and Inuit communities 
to set up and run substance abuse treatment programs. These programs 
offer many services to help individuals and families who are affected by 
substance abuse.
Health Canada  
Treatment Centre Directory  
1-800-640-0642  
TTY: 1-800-267-1245  
www.hc-sc.gc.ca

-50-For Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual, Transgendered and 
Queer (LGBTQ) Seniors

## Rainbow Health Ontario

This organization works to improve the health and well-being of the LGBT 
community through education, research, outreach and public policy 
advocacy. It also provides training on a range of health and wellness issues, 
including those that focus on LGBT seniors.
416-324-4100  
www.rainbowhealthontario.ca


## For Veterans
Veterans Independence Program
Eligible veterans can access various health benefits, including medical, 
surgical and dental care, prescription drugs and hearing/vision aids through 
Veterans Affairs Canada. In addition, programs such as the Veterans 
Independence Program help qualified veterans and others remain healthy 
and independent in their own homes and communities.
Veterans Affairs Canada  
1-866-522-2122  
www.veterans.gc.ca

-51-
5 HOUSING
Home Adaptations
Most of us want to continue living in our own home for as long as possible, 
but housing needs can change over the course of a lifetime. Sometimes 
even small and inexpensive modifications can help make your home safer 
and allow you to remain independent as you get older. If you’re thinking of 
modifying your home, these Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation 
online publications may be able to help:
• Maintaining Seniors’ Independence Through Home Adaptations: A 
Self-Assessment Guide  can help you learn about the types of home 
adaptations that are best for you.
• Accessible Housing By Design  highlights the range of renovations that can 
make your home more accessible.
• Preventing Falls on Stairs  can help you reduce the risk of falls and injuries 
on stairs .
Canada Mortgage and Housing Corpora tion 
1-800-668-2642  
TTY: 1-800-309-3388  
www.cmhc.gc.ca (> Consumers > Publications and Reports > Accessible & 
Adaptable Housing)
Financial Assistance Programs
If you are thinking of modifying your home to make it more accessible, there 
are a number of government programs that may be able to help you.
Ontario Renovates
The Ontario Renovates component of the Investment in Affordable Housing 
for Ontario (IAH) program provides forgivable loans to eligible low-income 
homeowners and landlords to make necessary repairs to homes or units 
- including upgrades to increase accessibility - and for the creation of 
secondary suites in existing single family homes. Funding for accessibility 
repairs made to a home or unit, up to a maximum of $5,000 is in the 
form of a grant. Affordable housing programs like this are administered 
by local municipalities and District Social Services Administration Boards, 

-52-also known as Service Managers. Service Managers decide whether to 
participate in Ontario Renovates based on local housing needs.
Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing  
Service Managers and Their Service Areas  
www.ontario.ca/kq46
Senior and/or Disabled Property Tax Relief
Property owners who build or modify a residence for a senior or a person 
with a disability may be eligible for property tax relief. Examples of 
alterations and additions include building a ramp or an additional room. If 
you believe your home is eligible, contact your local office of the Municipal 
Property Assessment Corporation.
Municipal Property Assessment Corporation  
1-866-296-MPAC (1-866-296-6722)  
TTY: 1-877-TTY-MPAC (6722)  
www.mpac.ca (> Property Owners > Property Assessment Procedures > Tax 
Incentive Programs > Senior and Disabled Property Tax Relief)
Property Tax Relief for Low-Income Seniors and Low-Income 
Persons with Disabilities
Low-income seniors and low-income persons with disabilities who own 
residential property may be eligible to receive relief from property tax 
increases that result from assessment reform. For more information or to 
determine your eligibility, please contact your local municipality.
Provincial Land Tax Deferral Program for Low-Income Seniors and 
Low-Income Persons with Disabilities
Under this program, low-income seniors and low-income persons with 
disabilities may apply for an annual deferral of part of the Provincial Land 
Tax and Education Tax increases. All deferred taxes must be repaid in full 
upon the sale or transfer of title to the property. This program is for those 
who pay their property taxes directly to the Province of Ontario.
Ministry of Finance  
1-866-400-2122  
TTY: 1-888-321-6774  
www.ontario.ca/rva

-53-If you would like to learn more about the Home and Vehicle Modification 
Program, please see the FINANCES, Financial Assistance section of this 
guide.
Housing Options
If you need help to decide what housing option might be best for you or for 
your family member, one of these professionals can help:
• Local Health Integration Network (LHIN) care coordinator 
• social worker in a geriatric center or in a family counselling agency
• community health nurse
Adult Lifestyle Communities
Adult Lifestyle Communities provide independent living residences for 
retirees or semi-retirees. Residences may include bungalows, townhomes, 
small homes or condominiums that provide the benefits of home ownership 
with on-site recreational and community activities. Amenities may include 
24-hour security, social interaction with peers along with leisure and 
recreational activities. Contact your local real estate agent to find an Adult 
Lifestyle Community near you.
Life Lease Housing
With life lease housing, you hold an “interest” in a property, but do not own 
it. This type of arrangement can have many advantages. For example, units 
are often less expensive than similarly sized condominiums in the area. In 
addition, life lease communities are restricted to people of a certain age, so 
residents are more likely to share common interests and needs. 
Retirement Homes
Retirement homes are private businesses that sell various combinations of 
accommodations (from shared rooms to large apartments), support services 
and personal care. Anyone can apply to live in a retirement home.
You are responsible for the entire cost of both your accommodation and 
care services. Accommodation rates are subject to rent control. Residences 
and rates can vary widely in terms of care, services and amenities provided. 
While you do not need to provide medical evidence that you need care, the 

-54-home will assess your needs to make sure you do not need more support 
than it can provide.
Retirement homes are regulated under the Retirement Homes Act, 2010. 
This legislation: 
• mandates care and safety standards for retirement homes, including 
emergency plans, infection control and prevention programs, assessment 
of care needs and care planning, police background checks and training 
for staff 
• created a Residents’ Bill of Rights that includes the right to know the true 
cost of care and accommodation and the right to live in an environment 
that promotes zero tolerance of abuse or neglect
• established the Retirement Homes Regulatory Authority, an arm’s-length 
organization that educates, licences and inspects retirement homes to 
ensure they meet prescribed standards.
For information about retirement homes in your community, contact the 
Retirement Homes Regulatory Authority.
Ontario’s Retirement Homes Regulatory Authority licences and inspects the 
province’s retirement homes, maintains a Public Register of all homes that 
have been granted or have applied for a licence (www.rhra.ca/en/register), 
handles complaints and educates retirement home staff and owners, 
consumers and the public about the Act.
Anyone in Ontario can call the Authority, free of charge, to get help resolving 
retirement home complaints. 
If you see or suspect harm or risk of harm to a resident resulting from poor 
care, abuse or neglect or unlawful conduct, or if you suspect misuse of a 
resident’s money, you must report  this to the Registrar of the Retirement 
Homes Regulatory Authority. You may report anonymously. 
Retirement Homes Regulatory Authority  
1-855-ASK-RHRA (1-855-275-7472)  
www.rhra.ca
Supportive Housing
Supportive housing programs provide on-site personal support services 
for seniors living as tenants in designated residential buildings. These 

-55-programs are designed to help people live independently in their own 
apartments. Services include personal support/attendant services, essential 
homemaking services and staff available 24 hours a day to handle regularly 
scheduled care and emergency needs.
Local Health Integration Network contact # 310-2222
Housing Options for Low-Income Seniors
Investment in Affordable Housing for Ontario (2014-2020)
This program provides funding to build and repair affordable housing, and 
for rental and down payment assistance to households in need. Affordable 
housing programs like this one are administered by local municipalities 
and District Social Service Administration Boards, also known as Service 
Managers. Service Managers decide which parts of the program to 
participate in based on local housing needs.
Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing  
Service Managers and Their Service Areas  
www.ontario.ca/kq46
Rent-Geared-To-Income Housing
Social housing is developed with government assistance for low-to moderate-
income Ontarians. The length of time before a unit becomes available will 
vary depending on your location. An application for rent-geared-to-income 
assistance can be made through your municipal Service Manager.
Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing  
Service Managers  
www.ontario.ca/kq46
Co-operative Housing
Co-operative housing residents do not own equity in their homes, but they 
have an equal say in how their community is run. A co-operative is non-profit. 
When you leave a housing co-operative, your home is returned to the co-
operative to be offered to someone else in need of affordable housing.
Ontario Regional Office of the Co-operative Housing Federation of Canada  
1-800-268-2537  
www.chfcanada.coop

-56-Emergency Rental Assistance
Community Homelessness Prevention Initiative
This initiative supports services and activities that prevent, reduce and 
address homelessness. It combines funding from the following five former 
homelessness-related programs into a single program administered by the 
Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing:
• Consolidated Homelessness Prevention Program
• Emergency Energy Fund
• Emergency Hostel Services
• Domiciliary Hostel Program
• Provincial Rent Bank
Services are delivered by local municipalities and District Social Services 
Administration Boards, also known as Service Managers.
Ministry of Municipal Affairs and Housing  
Service Managers and Their Service Areas  
www.ontario.ca/kq46
Landlord and Tenant Relations
Residential Tenancies Act, 2006
This legislation governs most landlord and tenant relationships across 
Ontario, sets out the rights and responsibilities of landlords and tenants who 
rent residential properties, and regulates most rent increases. The Act does 
not cover commercial tenancies.
Landlord and Tenant Board
The Landlord and Tenant Board resolves disputes between landlords and 
tenants and educates people about their rights and responsibilities. Both 
landlords and tenants can file an application, after which a hearing is 
scheduled. At the hearing, a member of the board will make a decision 
or, if both sides agree, a mediator will try to help both parties reach an 
agreement.
1-888-332-3234  
www.ontario.ca/rvb

-57-For Indigenous Seniors
habilitation Assistance Program On-Reserve
The Canada Mortgage and Housing Corporation offers financial assistance 
to First Nations and First Nation members to repair substandard homes to 
a minimum level of health and safety through the Residential Rehabilitation 
Assistance Program On-Reserve.  First Nations or individual First Nation 
members that require major repairs to their homes may be eligible to apply. 
The total household income must be at or below the established income 
threshold for their area.
1-800-668-2642  
TTY: 1-800-309-3388  
www.cmhc-schl.gc.ca/en/first-nation/index.cfm
Assisted Living Program
Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada’s Assisted Living Program is a 
residency-based program that provides funding for non-medical, social 
support services for seniors, adults with chronic illness, and children and 
adults with disabilities. The program helps individuals remain independent 
for as long as possible, while maximizing their quality of life at home and in 
the community.Residential Re
Indigenous and Northern Affairs Canada  
1-800-567-9604  
TTY: 1-866-553-0554  
www.canada.ca/indigenous-services-canada.html

-58-
6 LONG-TERM CARE HOMES
General Information
If you are looking for information about retirement homes, please see the 
HOUSING section of this guide. 
Long-term care homes are designed for people who need help with daily 
activities, supervision in a secure setting and/or access to 24-hour nursing 
care. They are also known as nursing homes, municipal homes for the aged 
or charitable homes for the aged. They are licensed or approved and funded 
by the Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care and must meet provincial 
standards when it comes to care, services and resident fees.
Ontario Long-Term Care Association  
647-256-3490  
www.oltca.com
AdvantAge Ontario  
905-851-8821  
www.advantageontario.ca
How to apply
If you are considering a long-term care (LTC) home, you must contact your 
local Local Health Integration Network (LHIN) determines eligibility for   
placement into LTC homes and manages wait lists. The LHIN will assign you 
a care coordinator who can assist you in completing your application for 
placement into a LTC home. You can identify up to five LTC homes on your 
application.
Local Health Integration Network  
# 310-2222
Choosing a Long-Term Care Home
Your LHIN care coordinator can help you learn more about your options. Here 
are a few things to consider when selecting a long-term care home:
• Is the staff friendly and concerned?

-59-• Do residents look content and well cared for?
• Is the home conveniently located and is public transportation available?
• Are visiting hours flexible?
• Is the home able to meet your religious, spiritual, cultural, language and
• dietary needs?
• Can you keep your personal belongings secure?
• Can you bring your own furniture or food?
It is very important that you and your family visit each of the homes you are 
considering.
Short-Stay Accommodation
Seniors who are recovering from illness or injury sometimes require short-
stay services offered by long-term care homes without needing to be 
admitted permanently. Short-stay residents need temporary
accommodations for a maximum of 90 days in one year. Some long-term 
care homes in Ontario currently offer “assess and restore” services through 
the Convalescent Care Program. Some people also opt for a short stay to 
give respite to their caregivers or to gain strength following a stay in hospital.
Accommodation Rates
While all nursing and personal care services are paid by the provincial 
government, residents of long-term care homes must pay for their 
accommodation costs (which are standard across Ontario.) This amount is 
called a co-payment. The amount of your co-payment depends on the length 
of your stay and the type of room you choose (private, semi-private and 
basic).
Long-stay residents need permanent accommodations for an indefinite 
period of time. Short-stay residents need temporary accommodations for a 
maximum of 90 days in one year. Accommodation rates are generally set by 
the Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care on July 1 each year.
www.ontario.ca/page/find-long-term-care-home#section-3

-60-If you cannot pay the monthly co-payment for basic accommodations, you 
may be eligible for a rate reduction. Speak with your LHIN care coordinator 
for more information.
Services
Long-term care homes are meant to feel like home – a place where every 
resident feels safe and comfortable. Homes have dining rooms and common 
areas, and may also have other amenities like shops, salons, worship 
facilities or gardens. All long-term care homes offer 24-hour supervision and 
nursing care.
The basic accommodation package includes the following:
• furnishings, meals, bed linens and laundry, personal hygiene supplies, 
medical/clinical supplies and devices, housekeeping, social and 
recreational programs, medication administration and assistance with 
daily activities
• 24-hour nursing and personal care and access to a physician/other health 
care professionals
• a unique “plan of care” that outlines your care requirements and which is 
reviewed/updated at least every three months.
For a fee, you could also add other services, including cable TV, private 
telephone, hairdressing services, etc. Remember that you cannot be charged 
for any of these services unless you first agree in writing.
Residents’ Rights
Residents of long-term care homes deserve to live in a respectful and 
compassionate environment, free from abuse and neglect. Homes are 
required to post a large-print version of the Residents’ Bill of Rights in both 
English and French in locations that are easily accessible. When you are 
admitted, you or your substitute decision-maker should receive a copy of the 
Residents’ Bill of Rights and be told how to raise concerns, lodge complaints 
or recommend changes to the home without fear of recrimination. Residents 
can also contact Family Council and the Ontario Association of Residents’ 
Council for assistance. 
www.ontario.ca/laws/statute/07l08#BK5

-61-Inspections
All long-term care home licensees in Ontario must comply with legislation 
that sets clear and detailed standards for residents’ care, quality of life and 
rights and the operation of long-term care homes. All homes receive an 
inspection at least once per year. The Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care 
performs unannounced inspections and applies enforcement measures.
Complaints
Anyone who is concerned about a long-term care home resident’s situation 
can report it or make a complaint. This includes a resident, a family member, 
someone employed by the home, anyone providing services to the resident 
or any member of the public. Each home is required to post its procedure for 
managing complaints. Individuals are encouraged to work with the home to 
resolve concerns directly.
Long-Term Care ACTION Line  
1-866-434-0144  
Director, Performance Improvement and Compliance Branch  
Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care  
11th Floor, 1075 Bay St.  
Toronto ON M5S 2B1
www.ontario.ca/page/long-term-care-home-complaint-process
Ontario Association of Residents’ Councils
Every long-term care home resident has the opportunity to participate on 
a residents’ council. The purpose of these councils is to encourage an 
exchange of ideas, suggestions and concerns. This provincial association 
supports residents’ councils, represents residents and promotes a standard 
of care.
1-800-532-0201  
www.ontarc.com

-62-Family Councils Ontario
Many long-term care homes have an active family council that consists of 
family and friends of residents who meet to provide each other with support, 
share information and advocate on behalf of residents.
Family Councils Ontario  
1-877-622-9968  
www.fco.ngo

-63-
7 SAFETY AND SECURITY
Consumer Protection
Consumer Protection Ontario helps you make smart choices in the 
marketplace, spend wisely, and protect your hard-earned money.
From door-to-door sales to home renovations, scams and frauds to identity 
theft, it’s important to ask the right questions and understand the dos and 
don’ts to avoid being taken advantage of or ripped off.
Visit www.ontario.ca/ConsumerProtection to learn the right questions to ask 
and for more detailed information about how to protect yourself and your 
money. Below you’ll find just a few examples of topics that may interest you.
Consumer Protection Ontario  
1-800-889-9768  
TTY: 1-877-666-6545  
www.ontario.ca/ConsumerProtection
Door-to Door Salespeople
Companies that sell or rent hot water heaters, air conditioners, furnaces, 
air purifiers, vacuums, and water filtration systems often send door-to-door 
salespeople to your home. Dealing with a salesperson at the door can be 
stressful. Always get a written contract and ask the right questions to avoid 
feeling pressured.
Ask:
• Can you leave me a copy of the contract to review before signing?
• If you are upgrading my water heater, can you supply me with my current 
contract?
• What are my options for cancelling this contract?
Home Renovations/Condos/Moving
Before you hire a contractor to make home improvements, ask for three 
references and be sure to check them. If you are thinking of downsizing to a 
condo, make sure you understand the by-laws, rules and restrictions specific 
to the condo before signing on the dotted line. And in planning your move, 
ask the right questions of a potential moving company.

-64-Ask:
• Can you provide references and a written estimate before I sign a 
contract?
• Who is responsible for loss or damage?
• Are you covered by the Workplace Safety and Insurance Board in case of 
injury?
Scams and Frauds
Don’t Get “Phished” In by an Email
Sending an email to someone falsely claiming to be a legitimate company 
or organization in an attempt to scam that person is known as “phishing”. It 
is an attempt to persuade consumers to disclose personal information, like 
usernames, passwords or credit card details.
“Phishers” often send messages with exciting or upsetting news and tell you 
to act immediately.
These scammer emails often direct people to fraudulent websites that 
appear to represent trusted organizations, such as banks. The websites 
ask visitors to provide personal information, such as credit card or social 
insurance numbers, bank account information or passwords. Criminals then 
use this information to commit fraud.
Protect Yourself:
• Never give out banking information, passwords or other personal 
information in response to this type of email.
• When in doubt, don’t click on any links in the email — instead directly 
contact the company or organization with whom you do business to ask if 
they sent you the email.
Telemarketing
Phony telemarketers have many different scams. One of the most common 
is the bogus vacation offer.
Someone calls and says you have won a vacation. However, to claim your 
prize, you are told you have to pay a processing fee. Or you may be told you 
have to enter into a timeshare agreement.

-65-If you have not requested information or entered a contest, be very careful. 
The caller may be asking for a processing fee in order to get your personal 
banking information or may simply want the processing fee and have no 
intention of providing you with the vacation.
Grandparent or Emergency Scams
In this scam, a con-artist phones a person claiming to be his or her 
grandchild, old neighbour or friend. The caller claims to be in some kind of 
trouble and needs money to be wired to them right away. The scammers may 
say they are in hospital, stuck in a foreign airport or have somehow landed in 
jail.
The caller often asks victims to not tell anyone in the family about the call. 
They may claim that other family members will blame or punish them for the 
accident or emergency.
Protect Yourself:
• Don’t ever wire money without verifying there is an emergency and the 
whereabouts of a grandchild.
• Be aware that scammers may try to disguise their voices by faking a bad 
phone connection.
• Be cautious; ask callers about personal details your grandchild would 
know – like his or her middle name.
• Do not disclose any personal information before you verify that you are 
indeed speaking with your grandchild.
• When in doubt, contact your local police department or the Canadian Anti-
Fraud Centre before sending any money.
Identity Theft
Identity theft occurs when someone uses your personal information without 
your knowledge or consent to commit a crime, such as fraud or theft.
Identity thieves steal key pieces of personal information — either physically 
or in other ways, without your knowledge — and use it to impersonate you 
and commit crimes in your name.

-66-In addition to names, addresses and phone numbers, thieves look for:
• Social insurance numbers
• Driver’s licence numbers
• Credit card and banking information
• Bank cards
• Calling cards
• Birth certificates
• Passports
Identity thieves can manipulate your information and invade your personal 
and financial life. They can use stolen identities to conduct spending sprees, 
open new bank accounts, divert mail, apply for loans, credit cards and social 
benefits, rent apartments and even commit more serious crimes.
Protect Yourself:
Never give personal information like your credit card or social insurance 
number to anyone who contacts you by phone. When making financial 
transactions online, look for two things on the payment page of the website:
1. The “s” – secure web addresses start with “https://” not “http://”
2. The lock icon – secure websites show a closed lock.
Consumer Protection Ontario — your go-to source for information
Consumer Protection Ontario can help seniors ask the right questions before 
they make important decisions. They can help you check if a business has 
had serious complaints or charges filed against them, teach you how to 
protect yourself against scams, phishing and identity theft, and learn what to 
do if you’re a victim. They can also help you to understand  your rights under 
the Consumer Protection Act.
For more information about Consumer Protection Ontario, visit:  
www.ontario.ca/ConsumerProtection.
Get helpful tips on the latest consumer protection alerts through social 
media:  

-67-Like us: www.facebook.com/ONconsumer  
Follow us: www.twitter.com/ONconsumer  
Watch us: www.youtube.com/ONconsumer
Investment Fraud
Fraud comes in many forms, including Investment Fraud. Always take 
steps to better protect yourself by checking the registration of any person 
or business trying to sell you an investment or give you investment advice 
before you invest. You should also know the common warning signs of 
investment fraud.
Four signs of investment fraud to look for are:
1. You can make a lot of money with little or no risk  
In general, higher-risk investments offer higher potential returns, and 
lower-risk investments offer lower returns. This is known as the risk-
return relationship. When you buy investments like stocks, there’s no 
guarantee you’ll make money. And the risk of losing money increases 
with the potential return. Investments that are considered low risk 
typically have returns similar to GIC rates. If your expected return is 
higher than this, you’re taking more risk with your money. Learn more 
about the risks of investing.
2. You get a hot tip or insider information  
The sources of “hot tips” or “insider information” don’t have your best 
interests in mind. Think about why they’re offering you tips, and how 
they benefit by telling you about them. If the hot tip is false, you will 
lose your money if you act on it. If it is really inside information about 
a public company, it would be illegal to act on it under insider trading 
laws.
3. You feel pressured to buy  
Scammers frequently use high-pressure sales tactics – because they 
want to get your money and then move on to other victims. If you’re 
asked to make a decision right away, or are presented with a limited 
time offer, it’s likely not in your best interests. Scammers know that if 
you have time to check things out, you may not fall for their scam.

-68-4. They’re not registered to sell investments  
Before you invest, check the registration and background of the 
person offering you the investment. In general, anyone selling 
securities or offering investment advice must be registered with their 
provincial securities regulator.  
To check registration, visit www.CheckBeforeYouInvest.ca
For additional investment fraud information, visit  
www.GetSmarterAboutMoney.ca
Ontario Securities Commission  
1-877-785-1555  
TTY: 1-866-827-1295  
www.osc.gov.on.ca
Canadian Anti-Fraud Centre
This centre collects information from consumers about various types of 
fraud and plays a crucial role in educating the public about specific mass 
marketing fraud pitches. SeniorBusters is a group of older adult volunteers 
who work to combat mass marketing fraud practices against seniors. The 
SeniorBusters program offers education, counselling and referrals for senior 
victims of illegal mass marketing fraud and identity theft or fraud. 
Canadian Anti-Fraud Centre  
1-888-495-8501  
www.antifraudcentre.ca
Emergency Services and Public Safety
9-1-1
In any emergency situation whenever police, fire or ambulance assistance is 
required immediately, CALL 9-1-1 where available.
Emergency Preparedness
Emergency Management Ontario offers information in the form of online 
emergency preparedness videos, resource links, fact sheets and a 
downloadable guide for people with disabilities or special needs. Learn how 
to build an Emergency Survival Kit, create a family emergency plan and stay 
safe in an emergency. You can also sign up for emergency alerts.

-69-Emergency Management Ontario  
1-800-565-1842  
www.ontario.ca/beprepared
Public Safety Canada also offers a wide variety of print and online safety 
tips and information, including publications such as Your Emergency 
Preparedness Guide  to help you and your family prepare for an emergency.
Public Safety Canada  
1-800-O-CANADA (1-800-622-6232)  
www.getprepared.gc.ca
Elder Abuse
“A single or repeated act, or lack of appropriate action, occurring 
within any relationship where there is an expectation of trust, which 
causes harm or distress to an older person.” 
(World Health Organization, 2002)
Elder abuse can take many forms, including financial, emotional, physical 
or sexual abuse or neglect. It is never acceptable. If you or someone you 
know is in immediate danger or if help is needed in an emergency, call 
9-1-1. If you or a senior you know has been a victim of a theft, fraud or 
physical assault, contact your local police department. For information and 
referral to community supports that may be of assistance, call 2-1-1 or visit 
www.211ontario.ca.
Elder Abuse Ontario (EAO)
EAO’s Regional Elder Abuse Consultants work with community agencies and 
local elder abuse networks to:
• coordinate community resources to improve access to services by abused 
or at-risk seniors
• train front-line staff to identify and respond to elder abuse
• raise awareness of elder abuse and where to find help.
Consultants act as a key resource to justice and community service 
providers and local elder abuse networks.
416-916-6728  
www.elderabuseontario.com

-70-Fire Safety
When it comes to fire safety, seniors are particularly vulnerable. Decreasing 
mobility and cognitive challenges can make it harder to respond to a fire and 
reach safety. To stay safe, remember the following:
• Make sure you have working smoke alarms. By law, smoke alarms are 
required to be on every storey of your home and outside all sleeping 
areas. Test your smoke alarms monthly and change the battery once a 
year or when the low battery warning sounds. If you suffer hearing loss 
or sleep with the bedroom door closed, install a smoke alarm inside your 
bedroom or install a flashing or vibrating smoke alarm.
• Have at least two ways out of every room if possible. Develop a home fire 
escape plan that considers your mobility challenges. Practice your escape 
plan often. For seniors with memory concerns, record escape plans and 
place copies in an easily accessible location.
• Stay in the kitchen when cooking. Cooking fires are one of the leading 
causes of fire injuries among older adults. Turn off the stove/oven if you 
leave the room while cooking. Wear tight fitting or rolled up sleeves when 
cooking. Loose or dangling clothing can easily catch fire if it comes in 
contact with the burners or open flame.  
• Encourage smokers to smoke outside or use large deep ashtrays that 
can’t be easily knocked over to collect ashes from cigarettes. Do not 
extinguish cigarettes in plant pots, which often contain peat moss, 
shredded wood and bark that can easily ignite.
• Empty ashtrays properly by dousing ashes with water, emptying them into 
a metal container and placing outside. Make sure they are completely out.  
Never empty ashtrays directly into the garbage.
• Never smoke in bed.
For more information on fire safety contact your local fire department or visit 
the Office of the Fire Marshal website at: 
www.ontario.ca/firemarshal
Legal Matters
Meeting Your Legal Needs
All lawyers and paralegals providing legal services in Ontario must be 
licensed by the Law Society of Upper Canada. Lawyers can help you with all 
types of legal issues: family or criminal matters, civil litigation, wills, powers 

-71-of attorney and estate matters, real estate transactions and administrative 
law matters. Licensed paralegals can represent you in Small Claims Court, 
at hearings before tribunals (such as the Landlord and Tenant Board) and 
for minor criminal charges where the maximum term of imprisonment is six 
months. The Law Society has a number of services to help you find a lawyer 
or paralegal.
The Law Society of Upper Canada  
1-800-668-7380  
TTY: 416-644-4886  
www.lsuc.on.ca
Law Society Referral Service
If you have a legal problem, this service will connect you to a lawyer or 
licensed paralegal who will provide a free 30-minute consultation to help you 
determine your rights and options.
1-855-947-5255  
http://lsrs.lsuc.on.ca/lsrs/
Legal Aid Ontario
Legal Aid Ontario provides legal assistance to low-income individuals and 
disadvantaged communities through a broad range of services. This service 
also includes information and referrals to duty counsel, community legal 
clinics or other agencies. Legal aid staff will ask you questions to help you 
find the service that best fits your legal issue. Legal Aid Ontario also funds 
numerous independent, community-based legal aid clinics. 
1-800-668-8258  
TTY: 1-866-641-8867  
www.legalaid.on.ca
Advocacy Centre for the Elderly (ACE)
ACE is a specialty community legal clinic that provides low-income seniors 
with legal services, including advice and representation to individual 
and group clients, public legal education, law reform and community 
development activities. ACE serves clients 60 years of age and over who live 
in the Greater Toronto Area, and may also provide services to seniors outside 
of Toronto if a case is of significance to the seniors’ community.

-72-416-598-2656  
www.acelaw.ca
Community Legal Education Ontario (CLEO)
CLEO is a community legal information clinic that produces free public legal 
education materials about a variety of issues, including Power of Attorney, 
elder abuse, etc. These publications describe the laws as simply and clearly 
as possible to help people understand and exercise their legal rights. CLEO 
does not give legal advice.
416-408-4420  
www.cleo.on.ca
ARCH Disability Law Centre
This specialty legal aid clinic is dedicated to defending and advancing the 
equality rights of people with disabilities in Ontario. ARCH legal services are 
provided by lawyers and articling students who report to a volunteer elected 
Board of Directors, at least half of whom are people with disabilities.
1-866-482-2724  
TTY: 1-866-482-2728  
www.archdisabilitylaw.ca
HALCO – HIV & AIDS Legal Clinic (Ontario)
HALCO is a community-based legal clinic that provides free legal assistance 
to people living with or affected by HIV/AIDS. Along with providing summary 
legal services, HALCO provides public legal education and works on law 
reform and community development initiatives.
1-888-705-8889  
www.halco.org
Ontario Human Rights Code
The Human Rights Code guarantees Ontarians equal rights and 
opportunities without discrimination in areas such as employment, housing 
and services. It prohibits discrimination on the basis of age in areas of 
employment, services, goods, facilities, housing accommodation, contacts 
and membership in trade and vocational associations. The Ontario Human 

-73-Rights Code’s protection against age discrimination extends to all persons 
over the age of 18. 
www.ontario.ca/humanrights
Office of the French Language Services Commissioner
This office ensures compliance with the French Language Services Act in the 
delivery of French services. Through its power to make recommendations, 
the Commissioner strongly encourages government ministries and agencies 
to proactively design policies and programs that are adapted to the 
Francophone population. The office’s mission is to ensure that the public 
receives high-quality French language services from the Government of 
Ontario.
1-866-246-5262  
TTY: 416-640-0093  
www.csfontario.ca/en
Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee
This office delivers services that safeguard the legal, personal and financial 
interests of certain private individuals and estates. It plays a role in:
• protecting mentally incapable people
• protecting the public’s interest in charities
• searching for heirs to estates that the OPGT administers
• investing perpetual care funds
• dealing with dissolved corporations.
The Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee will conduct an investigation 
when it receives information that an individual may be incapable and at risk 
of suffering serious financial or personal harm and no alternative solution is 
available. An investigation may result in the Office of the Public Guardian and 
Trustee asking the court for permission to make decisions on the person’s 
behalf on a temporary or long-term basis.
1-800-366-0335  
www.ontario.ca/rvm

-74-Power of Attorney
A Power of Attorney  is a legal document that gives someone else the right to 
make decisions on your behalf.
A Continuing Power of Attorney for Property  is a legal document that allows 
the person you name to make financial decisions for you. This authority 
can be used by that person while you are still mentally capable of making 
decisions yourself or even in the event that you become mentally incapable 
of making your own decisions about your property. In some cases, this Power 
of Attorney can direct that the named person only act if you are mentally 
incapable.
A General or non-continuing Power of Attorney for Property  is a legal 
document that only grants authority to another person while you are 
mentally capable. If you become mentally incapable, the authority ends. 
A Limited Power of Attorney for Property  is a legal document that allows the 
person you name to make decisions that are restricted in some way. This 
might include a “bank Power of Attorney”, which only affects assets that are 
in a named financial institution. This Power of Attorney may be limited to a 
specific period of time (for example, while you are out of the country) or for a 
specific asset (for example, a house that is to be sold).
A Power of Attorney for Personal Care  allows the person you name to make 
personal care decisions for you if you become mentally incapable. These 
decisions may involve shelter, safety, hygiene, nutrition, clothing and/or 
health care. If you don’t have a Power of Attorney for personal care in place 
and become incapable of making decisions about medical care or admission 
to a long-term care home, a family member would still have the right to 
make most decisions for you under the Health Care Consent Act. However, 
if no one is willing or able to make decisions for you, the Office of the Public 
Guardian and Trustee is required to make decisions on your behalf. This 
Power of Attorney can also provide directions to your decision maker about 
what kind of treatment you may want (or not want) in the event that you are 
incapable of telling anyone yourself. This Power of Attorney only takes effect 
if and when you are incapable.
The term “living will” refers to written directions or wishes about what 
medical care you may or may not want to have in the event you become 
incapable of making decisions about your care. Also known as an “Advance 

-75-Medical Directive”, a living will must be taken into consideration by your 
substitute decision makers, but it may not be binding, depending on the 
circumstances at the time. Unlike a Power of Attorney for personal care, it 
does not appoint a decision maker.
The Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee has developed a Power 
of Attorney Kit that can help you appoint the person you want to make 
decisions for you when you are no longer able to do so for yourself.
Ministry of the Attorney General  
1-800-366-0335  
www.ontario.ca/rvn
Advance Care Planning
Advance Care Planning is about making choices while you are competent 
about how you wish to be cared for in the future if you become incapable of 
making decisions. You can take steps now to ensure that your wishes are 
followed by providing someone you trust with the authority to act on your 
behalf.
Organ and Tissue Donation
It’s important that you talk to your family and friends about your decision to 
donate organs and tissue so they can understand, support and respect your 
wishes in the future. Even if you have signed a donor card, you still need to 
register your consent. By registering your consent to donate, you ensure that 
your donation decision is recorded and made available to the right people at 
the right time.
If you’d like to register as a donor, you can:
• fill out the Gift of Life consent form at www.beadonor.ca
• visit a ServiceOntario Centre
• register at www.ontario.ca/page/organ-and-tissue-donor-registration.
ServiceOntario  
1-866-532-3161  
TTY: 1-800-387-5559
Trillium Gift of Life Network  
1-800-263-2833  
www.giftoflife.on.ca

-76-End of Life
When someone close to you dies, you could be faced with making difficult 
decisions with little preparation. Knowing your rights ahead of time could 
make this stressful time a little easier. Ontario law protects consumers who 
are making final arrangements. For example, a funeral, transfer service, 
cemetery or crematorium operator must give you a current price list of all the 
supplies and services they offer before you enter into a contract, so you can 
compare rates. They also need to tell you if they will receive a commission by 
recommending certain services or suppliers.
By law you have 30 days to cancel a contract for funeral, burial or cremation 
services and get a full refund for any part of the contract not yet provided. 
In addition, all prepaid contracts written as of July 1, 2012 must be 
guaranteed. This means that if you have paid your contract in full, your 
service provider must supply everything specified in your contract when you 
need it and without any additional charges, even if prices have gone up.
Ministry of Government and Consumer Services  
1-800-889-9768  
www.ontario.ca/ConsumerProtection
Bereavement Authority of Ontario  
1-844-493-6356  
www.bao.ca
Wills and Estates
A will is a written document in which you indicate how your assets should be 
distributed upon your death. A will may also help you to take advantage of 
tax-savings opportunities and tax deferrals that may arise as a result of your 
death. It’s a good idea to have a lawyer who knows estate law prepare your 
will. Be careful when using a “Will Kit” as some of these kits may not comply 
with Ontario law. If you do not sign and witness your will in accordance with 
the rules of the Succession Law Reform Act, it may not be valid.
When a person dies, it’s important to know if he or she has a will and where 
it is kept. Some people file their will with local courts or with a lawyer, or 
keep it in a safety deposit box or a drawer at home. The executor of an 
estate carries out the wishes contained in a will.

-77-If a person dies without a will (intestate), then the estate is distributed 
according to Ontario’s Succession Law Reform Act. The estate may also 
end up being administered by the Public Guardian and Trustee in certain 
circumstances if an Ontario resident dies without a will, or with a will but 
with no one to act as estate trustee. If you have questions about your own 
will or about being a beneficiary, you should consult a lawyer.
Ministry of the Attorney General  
1-800-518-7901  
TTY: 416-326-4012  
www.ontario.ca/rvo
Death Out of Country
If a person dies in another country, contact the nearest Canadian 
government office in that country for instructions on how to proceed.
Emergency Watch and Response Centre  
Toll-free in Canada: 1-800-267-6788  
Outside Canada: 613-996-8885 (collect calls accepted)  
TTY: 1-800-394-3472  
Email: sos@international.gc.ca  
www.travel.gc.ca/assistance/emergency-assistance
Death Registration and Certificate
After a death, the attending physician or coroner completes the Medical 
Certificate of Death and gives it to the funeral director with the body 
of the deceased. To register a death, a family member and the funeral 
director must complete the Statement of Death with information about the 
deceased. Once completed, both documents are submitted to the local 
municipal clerk’s office by the funeral director. Cause of death information 
gathered from death registrations is used for medical and health research 
and for statistical purposes.
A funeral director will issue copies of a proof of death that can be used in 
certain situations, but some organizations may require an official death 
certificate. You might need a death certificate for:
• settling an estate
• insurance purposes

-78-• access to/termination of government services 
• genealogy searches.
• ServiceOntario  
1-800-267-8097  
TTY: 1-800-268-7095  
www.ontario.ca/page/how-get-copy-ontario-death-certificate-online
Pensions and Benefits
If you are the executor to an estate, you should contact the following (as 
they relate to the deceased person) to find out about eligibility or to cancel 
benefits, services or appointments. 
The executor should also contact former employers of the deceased for 
information about company pensions and benefits.
Old Age Security Program  
Guaranteed Income Supplement  
Canada Pension Plan  
1-800-277-9914  
TTY: 1-800-255-4786  
www.servicecanada.gc.ca
Harmonized Sales Tax Credit  
1-800-387-1193  
TTY: 1-800-665-0354  
www.cra-arc.gc.ca/bnfts/gsthst
Guaranteed Annual Income System  
1-866-ONT-TAXS (1-866-668-8297)  
TTY: 1-800-263-7776  
www.ontario.ca/gains
Veterans Affairs Canada  
1-866-522-2122  
www.veterans.gc.ca
Workplace Safety and Insurance Board  
1-800-387-0750  
TTY: 1-800-387-0050  
www.wsib.on.ca

-79-Ontario Works  
www.ontario.ca/rvp
National Defence Disability and Death Benefits  
1-866-522-2122  
www.forces.gc.ca
For more information about survivor benefits, please see the FINANCES 
section of this guide.
Income Taxes
As an executor, you must complete an income tax form for the deceased. 
You can contact your local tax services office for more information and 
assistance.
Canada Revenue Agency  
1-800-959-8281  
TTY: 1-800-665-0354  
www.cra.gc.ca/cntct/prv/on-eng.html  
www.cra-arc.gc.ca/tx/ndvdls/lf-vnts/dth/menu-eng.html
Banks and Credit Cards
The executor should contact the deceased person’s banks and other 
financial institutions, and credit card companies to cancel any cards.
Government Cards and Registries
The executor should contact any government agencies that apply to the 
deceased person:
Driver’s Licence and Accessible Parking Permit  
Ontario Health Card  
Outdoors Card  
ServiceOntario  
1-800-267-8097  
TTY: 1-800-268-7095  
www.serviceontario.ca

-80-Social Insurance Number  
Service Canada  
1-800-206-7218  
www.servicecanada.gc.ca
Canadian and Foreign Passports  
Passport Canada  
1-888-242-2100  
TTY: 1-888-576-8502  
www.cic.gc.ca/english/passport
Citizenship and Permanent Resident Cards  
Citizenship and Immigration Canada  
1-888-242-2100  
TTY: 1-888-576-8502  
www.cic.gc.ca
Indian Status  
Crown Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada  
1-800-567-9604  
TTY: 1-866-553-0554  
www.canada.ca/en/indigenous-northern-affairs
Firearms Licences  
Canadian Firearms Program  
1-800-731-4000  
www.rcmp-grc.gc.ca/cfp-pcaf/index-eng.htm
Vehicles
The executor may need to look into selling or transferring ownership of any 
vehicles, boats, snow machines, ATV’s or trailers, etc. and cancelling or 
transferring insurance policies. 
www.ontario.ca/faq/how-do-i-cancel-auto-insurance-or-transfer-ownership-
car-when-relative-dies
Property
The executor may need to:
• determine real estate and property title deeds and property taxes for 
primary and secondary residences

-81-• ask that mail be redirected or held by the local Canada Post Office
• contact a utility company, cable company, telephone company, electric 
company within the deceased’s municipality for name changes or 
cancellations
• arrange newspaper and magazine delivery name changes or 
cancellations.
Clubs, Organizations, Services and Professional Associations
In addition, the following individuals and organizations may need to be 
contacted:
• heath care practitioners, caregivers or health service organizations
• frequent travellers/buyers cards
• places where the deceased volunteered
• professional organizations where the deceased was a member
• post-secondary institutions where the deceased was an alumna/alumnus.
For Veterans
Last Post Fund
Funeral and burial services, including a military-style grave marker, are 
available for eligible veterans. These benefits are provided by the Last Post 
Fund on behalf of Veterans Affairs Canada.
Last Post Fund - Ontario Branch  
1-800-465-7113  
www.lastpostfund.ca

-82-
8 TRANSPORTATION
Driving
Staying mobile is important to seniors. Growing older doesn’t mean you 
have to give up driving. However, many older drivers voluntarily change their 
driving habits to accommodate changes associated with aging. 
Courses for Mature Drivers
If you are an older driver, consider a driving course or workshop that can 
help you learn new ways to address age-related driving challenges. Along 
with learning new strategies, you can review driving rules and regulations, 
common causes of collisions and avoidance techniques.
55 Alive Driver Refresher Course  
Canada Safety Council  
613-739-1535 ext. 233  
www.canadasafetycouncil.org
CAA’s Senior Driving
The Canadian Automobile Association (CAA) used decades of experience 
in road safety, along with expert assistance from the Canadian Medical 
Association and the Canadian Association of Occupational Therapists, to 
design a toolkit for seniors and their loved ones.
Use the toolkit to:  
• Assess fitness to drive under different conditions  
• Maintain driving confidence as you age  
• Take concrete steps to modify driving habits if needed
1-800-222-4357  
https://www.caa.ca/seniors/
Driver’s Licence Renewal
You can renew your driver’s licence at ServiceOntario Centres.
ServiceOntario  
1-800-267-8097  
TTY: 1-800-268-7095  
www.serviceontario.ca

-83-Senior Driver Renewal Program
If you are age 80 or over:
• You will have to renew your licence every 2 years.
• You need to undergo a driving record review, complete a vision test and 
participate in a Group Education Session followed by an in-class cognitive 
screening exercise to renew your licence.  The in-class cognitive screening 
exercise will help better assess your fitness to drive.
• You may be required to pass a road test before being able to renew your 
licence, or you may have to follow up and submit medical information. 
The Driver Improvement Counsellor at the Group Education Session will 
discuss this with you.
Seniors should allow at least 90 minutes to complete the new renewal 
requirements.
Ministry of Transportation  
1-800-267-8097  
TTY: 1-800-268-7095  
www.ontario.ca/page/renew-g-drivers-licence-80-years-and-over
Driver Examination Centres
DriveTest Centres provide all driver examination services such as vision, 
written and road tests for all licence classes. 
DriveTest  
1-888-570-6110 (automated phone booking line)  
www.drivetest.ca
If you don’t have a driver’s licence, you can apply for an Ontario Photo 
Card to use as government-issued identification. Please see the ONTARIO 
GOVERNMENT IDENTIFICATION page at the end of this guide to learn more. 
Accessible Parking Permit
If you qualify for an accessible parking permit, it will be issued to you at no 
cost. You can use it in any vehicle in which you are travelling. Make sure 
that the permit is visibly displayed when the vehicle you are in is parked in 
a designated accessible parking space. To qualify for an Accessible Parking 
Permit, you must be medically certified by your health practitioner as having 

-84-limited mobility and/or requiring mobility assistance, suffering from severe 
lung or cardiovascular disease, requiring portable oxygen or having poor 
vision. You can apply for a permanent permit that is good for up to five years 
or a temporary permit that is good for up to one year.
ServiceOntario  
1-800-267-8097  
TTY: 1-800-268-7095  
www.ontario.ca/accessibleparking
If you would like to learn more about the Home and Vehicle Modification 
Program, please see the FINANCES section of this guide.
Alternatives to Driving
If you are a mature driver, there may come a time when you will have to think 
about limiting your driving or perhaps stop driving altogether. This could be 
a difficult decision to make as you may fear losing your independence and 
becoming a burden to others. Don’t be afraid to talk about your concerns 
with family, friends and your doctor. Make sure that you are well informed 
about available alternatives to driving in your community. Plan ahead for the 
time when you may need to cut back and eventually stop driving.
Warning Signs
It’s important to recognize the signs that you may no longer be a safe driver. 
Here are a few things to watch out for:
• Are you nervous behind the wheel?
• Do other drivers frequently honk at you?
• Have you had a number of fender benders and near misses?
• Do family or friends worry about your driving?
• Do your children trust you to drive the car?
• Do your children let you drive with your grandchildren in the car?
• Have you ever become lost when driving or forgotten where you were 
going?

-85-Alternatives
There are many alternatives to driving. Here are a few options to consider:
• buses, taxis and other forms of public transit
• having friends and family members drive you
• keeping a vehicle that others drive for you
• van/bus pick-up scheduled and on demand from senior residences and 
other groups
• pre-paid taxi vouchers
• walking
• volunteer driver services that may be available in your area.
Call 2-1-1 to find organizations in your community that provide 
transportation services for seniors or visit www.211ontario.ca.
Buying or Selling Vehicles
Used Vehicle Information Package (UVIP)
Over one million used vehicles change ownership in Ontario every year. To 
help consumers make better informed decisions, the seller must provide a 
UVIP. The UVIP is available from all ServiceOntario Driver and Vehicle Licence 
Issuing Offices.
ServiceOntario  
1-800-267-8097  
TTY: 1-800-268-7095  
www.ontario.ca/UsedVehicle
Public Transportation
Many communities offer bus service and specialized transit services. 
Specialized services such as Wheel-Trans in Toronto, Para Transpo in Ottawa 
and Windsor Handi-Transit use smaller vehicles equipped with a lift or ramp 
for persons using mobility devices, such as wheelchairs and scooters. Some 
communities may use fully accessible buses on both fixed and flexible 
routes.
To learn more about public transportation services in your community, call 
2-1-1 or visit www.211ontario.ca.

-86-Volunteer Drivers
Volunteer driver services may be available in your area through the Red 
Cross, your Royal Canadian Legion branch or a Seniors Active Living Centres.
GO Transit
GO Transit is a regional public transit service that serves the Greater Toronto 
Area and Hamilton, with routes extending to communities across the Greater 
Golden Horseshoe. GO Transit fares vary by distance travelled. Seniors 65 
years or older can travel for half the regular adult fare. Single-ride tickets 
and day passes are available for seniors. The majority of GO stations are 
accessible to passengers who use mobility devices or prefer step-free 
access.
1-888-GETONGO (438-6646)  
TTY: 1-800-387-3652  
www.gotransit.com
For Veterans
Veteran Graphic Licence Plate
This licence plate is available to eligible veterans whose service has been 
certified by the Royal Canadian Legion. Visit any ServiceOntario centre to get 
a Veteran Plate Eligibility Certification or visit www.ontario.ca/customplates.
Royal Canadian Legion - Ontario Provincial Command  
905-841-7999  
www.on.legion.ca

-87-
9 KEY CONTACTS
Government of Ontario
Seniors’ INFOline  
1-888-910-1999  
TTY: 1-800-387-5559
Contact Seniors’ INFOline to learn more about Government of Ontario 
programs and services for seniors or to request publications.
ServiceOntario  
1-800-267-8097  
TTY: 1-800-268-7095  
www.serviceontario.ca
ServiceOntario provides a wide range of Government of Ontario information 
in one location. You can access information online, by telephone or in person 
at a ServiceOntario centre.
ServiceOntario Publications  
1-800-668-9938  
TTY: 1-800-268-7095  
www.ontario.ca/publications
Contact ServiceOntario Publications to order Government of Ontario 
publications.
Local Health Integration  
Network contact  
# 310-2222 
Contact the LHIN  to learn more about home and community care options 
available in your community.
Telehealth Ontario  
1-866-797-0000  
TTY: 1-866-797-0007
Call Telehealth Ontario for confidential health advice and general health 
information. This service is available 24 hours a day, seven days a week in 
multiple languages. 

-88-Victim Support Line  
1-888-579-2888  
www.ontario.ca/bfbj
The Victim Support Line is a province-wide, multilingual, toll-free information 
line providing a range of services to victims of crime. 
Emergency Management Ontario  
1-800-366-0335  
www.ontario.ca/beprepared
Contact Emergency Management Ontario to learn more about emergency 
planning.
Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee  
1-800-366-0335  
www.ontario.ca/rvm
The Office of the Public Guardian and Trustee safeguards the legal, personal 
and financial interests of certain private individuals and estates.
Ombudsman Ontario  
1-800-263-1830  
TTY: 1-866-411-4211  
www.ombudsman.on.ca
Ontario’s Ombudsman takes complaints from the public about provincial 
government services and resolves them wherever possible.
Government of Canada
Service Canada  
1-800-O-Canada  
(1-800-622-6232)  
TTY: 1-800-926-9105  
www.servicecanada.gc.ca
Pension Programs – Service Canada  
1-800-277-9914  
TTY: 1-800-255-4786
Contact Service Canada to learn more about programs and services offered 
by the federal government.

-89-Local Government
211 Ontario  
www.211ontario.ca
Call 2-1-1 to learn more about community and social services in your area. 
Services are free, confidential and available 24 hours a day, seven days a 
week in more than 150 languages.
Association of Municipalities of Ontario (AMO)  
www.amo.on.ca
Visit Association of Municipalities of Ontario’s website to learn more about 
municipal services and programs available in your area, including seniors’ 
services, health and wellness programs, housing services, recreation, public 
health and social assistance.
Community Safety
Call 9-1-1 in any emergency situation whenever police, fire or ambulance 
assistance is required.
Crime Stoppers  
1-800-222-TIPS (8477)  
www.canadiancrimestoppers.org
Call Crime Stoppers to anonymously report information about a crime or 
potential crime.
Ontario Securities Commission  
1-877-785-1555  
TTY: 1-866-827-1295  
www.osc.gov.on.ca
If you suspect investment fraud, report it immediately.
The Canadian Anti-Fraud Call Centre  
1-888-495-8501  
www.antifraudcentre.ca
Contact the Canadian Anti-Fraud Call Centre to report a fraud or to learn 
more about fraud prevention.

-90-
10 ONTARIO GOVERNMENT I.D.
For general information about Ontario government identification:
ServiceOntario  
1-800-267-8097  
TTY: 1-800-268-7095  
www.serviceontario.ca
Ontario Photo Card
This wallet-sized card provides government-issued identification to Ontarians 
who do not have a driver’s licence, making it easier for them to do things 
such as travel, open a bank account and take part in other activities that 
require official identification. To apply for an Ontario Photo Card, you must be 
a non-driving resident of Ontario, 16 years of age and over. The card is valid 
for five years. For more information, please visit www.ontario.ca/photocard.
Driver’s Licence
An Ontario driver’s licence is your proof that you are authorized to drive a 
motor vehicle. You must carry it with you whenever you drive. This wallet-
sized card bears your digitized photograph and signature. To learn more, 
please visit www.ontario.ca/page/renew-drivers-licence. 
Enhanced Driver’s Licence
An enhanced driver’s licence acts as a travel document between Canada 
and the United States when you are travelling by road or water. It cannot be 
used to enter the United States by air. To learn more, please visit  
www.ontario.ca/driving-and-roads/enhanced-drivers-licence.
Ontario Health Insurance Plan (OHIP) Health Card
Residents of Ontario must have a valid Ontario health card to show that they 
are entitled to health care services paid for by OHIP. Either a photo health 
card or a red and white health card is acceptable to access insured health 
services provided the card is valid and belongs to you. Your health card is to 
be used only to access health care services. Do not show your card or give 

-91-your health card number to anyone other than a health care provider when 
you receive services or to the Ministry of Health and Long-Term Care. For 
more information, please visit www.ontario.ca/healthcard.
To Change Your Address
Ontario’s online integrated address change is a fast and easy way to notify 
the government of your change of address. Information can be entered 
only once and you can choose which ministries to notify of your change. 
This includes your Driver’s Licence or Vehicle Registration, Health Card or 
Outdoors Card. Please do not change your address before you move. 
To access this online service, please visit  
www.ontario.ca/addresschange.


